A Crucial Update on Prescribing Controlled Substances Past May 11th That Explains Everything And Removes All Doubt and Worry
What every prescribing clinician and patient needs to know.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
MAY 01, 2023
∙ PAID
7
2
Share

This title is total clickbait. Nobody has any idea what's going on. Or at least, some of us do, but it's based on understanding human behavior and how organizations behave.

Bootleg Advertisement: taking things to the post office is a massive pain in the ass. Sometimes you must do that. 83B elections are one example. I just filed my 83B election with DoNotPay; you can use it also. Here's the referral code. And boom. I just made up an advertisement for my newsletter.

This newsletter was brought to you by my DoNotPay.com referral code:

join.donotpay.com/refer/670259

The public health emergency ends by presidential decree on May 11. Absent any other action, everything at that time will revert to the prior state of the world. Everybody who's read a book about time traveling knows this is gonna be a problem:

That means the Ryan Haight Act will* return!

*The Above Is Not Likely to Happen. WHY?

The proposed rule, which has received almost 30k comments including one from yours truly, still needs to have all of those public comments, including ones filed on paper with physical mail, read!

Why the act requires an in-person visit is not obvious so I will explain it. And it's about making somebody's day easier!

This law was an administrative workaround. It made the DEA have an easier time dealing with online pill mills. The requirement for an in-person visit is categorical: either a visit happened, or it didn't. This requirement does not exist because it is clinically necessary. The DEA are not clinicians. However, it does mean that if a categorical variable, visit/no visit, landed on the no visit side of the coin, they save themselves the trouble of an administrative review when revoking a license. The requirement existed to save time for the DEA. That's it. Absent this categorical reason to pull somebody's DEA license, they must thoroughly review whether the prescribing was appropriate, and every case is tiresome. It's easier to say they broke a rule about a categorical variable.

Notably, the likelihood that in-office visits will immediately return for everybody everywhere is low.

I'm not saying that because I have a Palantir (“of Isengard” not “of the Bay Area”) or other off-brand crystal ball. But, I am confident about that statement because I understand that somebody would probably lose their job if that's what happened.

The most motivating thing to anybody in a large organization is not getting fired for doing something reckless. To let the public health emergency expire with no action from the DEA as it relates to the millions of people who are now getting their controlled substances prescribed via telehealth? That would be a public health disaster; somebody would look like a huge dope, there would be congressional hearings, somebody would get fired, and other people would be embarrassed.

If you work at the DEA, you are, by definition, a Narc. I don't mean that pejoratively. I suggest that you probably care about things being done in an appropriate and regulatory-compliant way. That probably means you don't want to be chastised in front of Congress because of a giant public health disaster—imagine millions of ADHD kids without meds, millions relapse on opioids without suboxone, etc.— thanks to you.

Not looking like you created a tidal wave of death and misery? That's a good look for Narcs!

The human motivations of DEA agents and employees are crucial to understanding. Don't be reckless. Don't look reckless. Don't do reckless things. Avoid unmitigated disasters. It's impossible to get everybody who is getting care by telehealth to physical in-person providers who don't exist instantly. It would be a disaster. So it won't happen. The entire Covid era of innovation in telehealth and it's delivery of care happened. Clocks don't run backward. The time machine is an awesome book, but it's a terrible way to make public policy.

The can will be kicked down the road. There will be an extension. There will be another extension probably. And eventually, they'll figure it out.

Please feel free to share this explanation so I don't have to explain it to people directly anymore. This is going to save me a lot of time. I appreciate your help!

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
7 Likes
∙
2 Restacks
7
2
Share
Previous
Next
