Title: Akathisia from Meditation!? - by Owen Scott Muir, M.D.
URL: https://thefrontierpsychiatrists.substack.com/p/akathisia-from-meditation
Source element: <article>
---
Akathisia from Meditation!?
A connection made by my readers.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
MAR 24, 2024
∙ PAID
7
1
Share

The Frontier Psychiatrists is a daily health-themed newsletter. Today, I’m following a thread unearthed by my prior articles on akathisia (an adverse effect of Abilify and other antipsychotic drugs). A reader pointed out that the phenomenon is eerily similar to one described in meditation circles as “samadhi pain” (according to Shinzen Young). This led to me ask the question that is the topic of today’s writing—is mediation a dopamine circuit modulator, and thus producing the same adverse effects in some individuals as antipsychotic medications?

Subscribed
Noted meditation teacher Shinzen Young.

Here is my description of akathisia:

Imagine going to the most dreadful movie you’ve ever experienced—if Michael Bay re-made an Inconvenient Truth—and being forced, with a gun to your head, to not move an inch. Imagine being forced to listen to some tech bro mansplain Bitcoin, and having to smile, motionless, the whole time…if you were secretly Satoshi Nakamoto. Now take those feelings, and move them away from the world of words, into your legs. Have to move them. Have. to. move. them.

The horrible part of this inability to remain motionless is that the movement doesn’t scratch the itch very well. People who experience akathisia will pace back and forth, but it never really feels better.

A reader summed it up as “restless leg syndrome for the soul” and, not knowing Shizen and I are acquainted, sent me his description from an article entitled:

“The Icky-Sticky Creepy-Crawly It-Doesn't- Really-Hurt-But-I-Can't-Stand-It Feeling”

meditators sometimes go through periods when the more they relax, the worse they feel! Specifically, there is a distinct kind of yucky body discomfort which occasionally arises in meditation. There is no single expression in the English language to denote this quality of sensation although we ought to have a word for it since it is such a common phenomenon. I once heard a famous Burmese teacher refer to it as "samadhi pain" because unlike other discomforts which immediately improve when you go deeper into samadhi(relaxation, concentration), this discomfort can get temporarily worse. The best I can do is try to characterize it in a few sentences. If you have ever experienced it, you will immediately recognize what I am trying to describe. For lack of a better term, I sometimes refer to this phenomenon as "relaxation pain."

The only error in Shinzen’s description is, perhaps, the “no single expression” contention! It sounds a heck of a lot like Akathisia! Shinzen continues:

The body may even move, shake or twitch as though it were in extreme agony, but there is little actual pain. It seems unbearable, yet it doesn't actually hurt. The worst part is that the more you relax, the "yuckier" you feel. When this phenomenon arises, it seems that the last thing you would want to do is to keep still for even a moment.

Sure sounds like Akathisia! Dr. Sachdev argues in a similar vein in this 1995 paper:

Even though the term has come to be used synonymously with drug-induced akathisia, its origin was in the pre-neuroleptic era, and it is still often used to describe syndromes not related to medication.1

Akathisia, we will recall was first described in 1903, by Hastovec.2

We have two similar-sounding pairings of internal experience and hard-to-describe sensations. For us to accept the hypothesis that they share similar pathophysiology, we’d need evidence that mediation had some impact on the same neural circuits that dopamine-blocking drugs do? Like, for example, this article, entitled:

Increased dopamine tone during meditation-induced change of consciousness

In which they popped meditators into a PET scanner:

Using 11 C-raclopride PET we demonstrated increased endogenous dopamine release in the ventral striatum during Yoga Nidra meditation.

PET of course stands for positron emission tomography, and I addressed some of the complexities around computing tomography with different radio frequencies in prior articles like this one. The methodology is actually not too complicated, even if the physics of how the image is captured is. In these PET scans, Scientists use a radio-labeled tracer that is selective for specific neurotransmitters, not just the non-specific changes in BOLD signal from increased cellular metabolism as seen in my beloved fMRI scans.3

The tracer competes with endogenous dopamine for access to dopamine D2 receptors.

When more dopamine is released, you see less tracer bound. This is what they saw comparing within-individuals. They did two scans per person, one just lying there, and one meditating:

[11] C-raclopride binding in the ventral striatum decreased by 7.9%. During meditation, this corresponds to a 65% increase in endogenous dopamine release.4

data from the PET study to make this article more believable by including pictures of brains.

Meditation, in real-time, releases more dopamine in the ventral striatum, which ardent readers will recall is the home of the nucleus accumbens (as featured in both the akathisia article and the article on the topic of compulsive behavior related to aripiprazole).

Subsequent authors used SPECT scans to evaluate changes in dopamine on the time scale of pre-post meditation retreat:

We observed significant decreases in dopamine transporter binding in the basal ganglia and significant decreases in serotonin transporter binding in the midbrain after the retreat program.5

The spatial resolution of the SPECT devices I have mocked in prior comedic performances. Suffice it to say, midbrain and basal ganglia are about as good as we are getting with a SPECT scan. Other authors have noted that, grossly, there is a variety of data describing neurotransmission level variation in meditation:

dopamine and melatonin are found to increase, serotonin activity is modulated, and cortisol as well as norepinephrine have been proven to decrease. These findings are reflected in functional and structural changes documented by imaging techniques such as fMRI or EEG.6

If movement disorders research has taught me anything, it’s that none of this is simple, when we drill down into the actual circuits involved.

A graphic illustrating a schematic of brain regions incolved in tardive dyskinesia.

We end up getting “an inhibition of an inhibition of an inhibition” explanations which—while true—are hard for the human brain to grok. For example, I’m sure the following is endlessly intuitive:

A graphic on the mechanism of antipsychotic-induced parkinsonism.

Those graphics are intended to illustrate one point, much like Herr Zuckerberg chose to memorialize our inability to describe human relationships circa before he destroyed our ability to have them in the real world: It’s complicated.

From Shinzen’s description, if we accept that he is describing an experience that will have a plausible neurobiology akin to akathisia, we need to back solve to plausibility for this to be a good article.

Those dopaminergic circuits are modulated by other neurotransmitters, including inhibitory GABA and others:

The neurotransmitters most specifically linked to akathisia are gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and serotonin. GABA (mainly via GABAA receptor interactions) exerts an influence on dopamine-dependent signaling, thus, increasing or reducing locomotor activity.7

Activity…or, perhaps, increasing the sensation that we need to move.

Lo and behold, we have a PET study in antipsychotic-exposed individuals with schizophrenia to evaluate this possibility8—they even used the same radiolabeled tracer in our above meditation study so we don’t have to force you, dear readers, to learn a new thing:

[authors used] positron emission tomography with [11C]raclopride to better characterize the neurochemical mechanism underlying these adverse effects.

In what is either an ah-ha moment (or confirmation bias):

the analysis revealed that the Liverpool University Neuroleptic Side Effect Rating Scale score had significant positive associations with D2 occupancy in the precommissural dorsal caudate, post-commissural caudate, and ventral striatum.

That is to say, the increase in dopamine release seen in the scans of experienced meditators and the scans of the individuals with schizophrenia with the most symptoms of akathisia showed changes in the same part of the brain, the ventral striatum, with the same neurotransmitter, dopamine, that we identified as the likely loci for akathisia in my first article on the topic. This is, of course, the home of the nucleus accumbens, which is implicated in both the compulsive pleasure-seeking in Abilify exposed individuals….and, plausibly, the pleasure of meditation. Again, Shinzen Young:

Here is how it works. The meditation produces relaxation and this feels good. The meditator can then focus on that pleasure skillfully, i.e. with equanimity and high concentration. This causes the pleasure to become more profoundly satisfying which in turn encourages even greater equanimity and concentration. This in turn causes the meditator to drop into an even deeper state of meditation producing more pleasure.

I suspect, dear readers, we have a working hypothesis. Meditation is a profound modulator of deep brain systems that modulate reward. Its adverse effects can, perhaps, be explained by those same neural circuits.

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

Please consider sharing this work with your friends, enemies, colleagues, and confederates. I will also note that I am likely to find it very pleasurable via modulation of my dopamine pathways if you become a paid subscriber.

Subscribed

1

Sachdev, P. (1995). The development of the concept of akathisia: a historical overview. Schizophrenia research, 16(1), 33-45.

2

Ball, R. (1985). Drug-induced akathisia: a review. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 78(9), 748-752.

3

Hillman EM. Coupling mechanism and significance of the BOLD signal: a status report. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2014;37:161-81. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-071013-014111. PMID: 25032494; PMCID: PMC4147398.

4

Kjaer, T. W., Bertelsen, C., Piccini, P., Brooks, D., Alving, J., & Lou, H. C. (2002). Increased dopamine tone during meditation-induced change of consciousness. Cognitive Brain Research, 13(2), 255-259.

5

Newberg, A. B., Wintering, N., Yaden, D. B., Zhong, L., Bowen, B., Averick, N., & Monti, D. A. (2018). Effect of a one-week spiritual retreat on dopamine and serotonin transporter binding: a preliminary study. Religion, Brain & Behavior, 8(3), 265-278.

6

Esch, T. (2013). The neurobiology of meditation and mindfulness. In Meditation–neuroscientific approaches and philosophical implications (pp. 153-173). Cham: Springer International Publishing.

7

Salem H, Nagpal C, Pigott T, Teixeira AL. Revisiting Antipsychotic-induced Akathisia: Current Issues and Prospective Challenges. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2017;15(5):789-798. doi: 10.2174/1570159X14666161208153644. PMID: 27928948; PMCID: PMC5771055.

8

Kim, Jong-Hoon MD, PhD*; Son, Young-Don PhD†; Kim, Hang-Keun MSc†; Lee, Sang-Yoon PhD†; Cho, Seo-Eun MSc*; Kim, Young-Bo MD, PhD†‡; Cho, Zang-Hee PhD†. Antipsychotic-Associated Mental Side Effects and Their Relationship to Dopamine D2 Receptor Occupancy in Striatal Subdivisions: A High-Resolution PET Study With [11C]Raclopride. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 31(4):p 507-511, August 2011. | DOI: 10.1097/JCP.0b013e318222353a

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
7 Likes
∙
1 Restack
7
1
Share
Previous
Next
