An Open Letter to Every Company from Apple
All your market share...are belong to us.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
JUN 05, 2023
∙ PAID
1
1
Share
Article voiceover
0:00
-5:08

Dear every other company.

Here at Apple, we love to make a great products.

You made a product once. Now we make every product, using machine learning, and represented it in our proprietary Virtual universe, which is the same as your universe, except we make a commission off of everything anybody builds inside of it. I heard you once made a product?

We also make that product. Look:

We also calculate the risk on that other product. Then we made it easy to make some adjustments. Did I mention were legally an able to do bank stuff? Just turn up the sound, you'll get it!

And can connect this thing and that thing. And then when you look at that thing, the data be kept by us, you know, here in our product. The one that you couldn't possibly make.

We can render the entire world. Our latency is 12 ms. In our first generation device. What was that?

Sorry, we were too busy relaxing in the virtual universe in which only our products exist and yours don't if we don’t want them to. Because we put an entire computer in your brain without even drilling a hole.

We just followed your fingers. With the ability to integrate LIDAR onto your face and track your eyeballs with infrared sensors. And go everywhere with you on your watch. And process it all on device so there's no problems with going to and from unencrypted devices.

I think it's cute they didn't just immediately make that above workplace a hospital. But it's obviously going to be a hospital. Just make a little adjustment, in the surgical OR, without having to touch anything!

Yeah, no seriously, just use your hands, and your eyes, and your voice, and it will do it all for you.

Yes.

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

We know.

We know.

It's been a pleasure pretending there are any other companies.

Love,

Apple.

Subscribed

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
1
1
Share
Previous
Next
