An Open Letter to Billionaires: I'm Available for Silencing
This newsletter wants in on the big time!
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
NOV 01, 2024
∙ PAID
8
1
Share

The Frontier Psychiatrists is a daily health-themed publication. It is not yet owned by Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk, Warren Buffett, George Soros, or any other billionaire. However, I have not yet endorsed a presidential candidate, and I am willing to be acquired… for the purpose of silencing me.

Let me explain the stance of The Frontier Psychiatrists’ editorial board. As a resident of the state of New York, my vote will do very little, and I've already done my voting this year.

If you haven't voted, you can vote early in most states; you don't have to leave it until the last minute. If you want actual good advice, read this article, and go vote.

That said, we have a long history of taking controversial stances about political issues, dating back to July 1, 2022. We (the royal we) have stood resolutely against this or that, and we are likely to do so again. That royal We person would love to have his media empire (TFP newsletter, tiktok, music, youtube channel, books, podcasts, etc) acquired for the purpose of silencing me. My silence is available to any billionaire who wants to purchase this newsletter, and shut me up. I believe believe in free speech. But I also believe in better paid speech. I would like to be paid more. I would even be willing to be paid more to say less. I write every day, it's a real drag some days. Some days I'd rather not write something at all. But since I write something every day, I'll put on my big boy pants, and I'll bang out this article, and sometimes it's good, and sometimes it's not so good.

The Washington Post recently declined to endorse a presidential candidate as a wholly owned property of billionaire Jeff Bezos, reportedly after Bezos applied significant pressure to the editorial board, leading to a spate of resignations and hundreds of thousands of people canceling their subscriptions. Their publication's motto is “Democracy Dies in Darkness,"…and gosh, does it ever!

I’d feel great about dying in billionaire sponsored darkness also. It seems like getting silenced is part of how we role in 2024. Cut me in already. UnitedHealthgroup, I’m looking at you too…this whole thing could be rolled up with just one NDA.

Thank you for reading, hopefully for the last time.

Subscribed

Thanks for reading The Frontier Psychiatrists! This post is public so feel free to share it.

Share

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
8 Likes
∙
1 Restack
8
1
Share
Previous
Next
