An Offer, Withdrawn...
A LinkedIn scam takes a dark turn!
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
JAN 13, 2024
∙ PAID
14
2
Share

The Frontier Psychiatrists primary author spends quality time on LinkedIn. This has led to a predictable series of scam messages. They invite me, on behalf of an unnamed boss, absent any due diligence, to steward a 150m project. Apparently there are either a lot of these shadowy bosses around, or there is one such boss with a lot of employees all messaging the same satire author in rapid succession.

Today’s column is not anything but silly….

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

Some examples

Of course also including…

And:

What an exciting time for whatever company that is!

With one such inquiry, I delved a bit deeper, and like the dwarves of Moria, regretted it. Meet Mahmoud. His boss is also interested in what I have to offer:

200m! “Yes, interested.”

I propose a win-lose. He doesn’t quite know what to do with this offer…but like most physicians executives, offered 200m projects by strangers, I wanted to know more!

Oh, of course. Sanofi! They love psychiatrists who are “good in” neurology! Sanofi is a real Company with real management however…

I have a confession—I don’t really know the “boss” of Sanofi. But it was worth a try…this didn’t seem to phase the intrepid junior admin who was really more into a win-win than my proposed win-lose.

I propose a tantalizing approach…just give me their number?

It wasn’t long before my love of gift cards came to the surface! I love them! I adore them from strangers.

Where is our win-win? Where is my gift card?

I loop him in on the podcast version:

But it seems our Win-win is going south…and I suspect he hasn’t even looked at my account. So I ask some basic questions…

He is right—I am pretty boring. Just as the conversation comes to a close, the pretense drops—and the fangs come out!

The most shocking this about this scam attempt Is that I wasted a real humans time!

Just a simple man, looking to help find people in various fields…

Thanks for reading this rather silly column on a Saturday!

Subscribed

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
14 Likes
∙
2 Restacks
14
2
Share
Previous
Next
