An Open Letter From Psychiatric Medications
Regarding the allegation that we are a Quick Fix
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
JUL 14, 2024
∙ PAID
3
8
2
Share

Dear Readers,

I am writing to you today on behalf of all psychiatric medicines. My name is Prozac, and I’m the first of the SSRIs—that’s Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors, to the uninitiated. It's time to address the allegation that we are some “quick fix.” This statement is both false and defamatory. Oral medications for psychiatric conditions work only slowly, and, most often, we do a 50% reduction in symptoms. We fix little and, with few exceptions, do not do much of anything quickly.

The Frontier Psychiatrists is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Subscribed

It's worth understanding what this frequently levied criticism is really about. It's about stigma. People with psychiatric conditions are shamed for seeking help. One of the ways that they are shamed is by accusing them of taking the easy way out. I would have been more successful if that had been true. I’ll use myself as a case in point. Fluoxetine, my parent compound, has a half-life of about two weeks. I also have an active metabolite, norfluoxetine. This means it takes about ten weeks—five half-lives—to get to a steady state blood level. I don't know that anyone has been struggling with suicidal depression who would call ten weeks fast, and that's to get to the blood level at which I can start working. I will acknowledge other medicines that have shorter lives, but honestly? This means they have more withdrawal symptoms. They don't change the symptoms of a psychiatric disorder more rapidly. Quick fixes? Not the business we are in.

I know what you're thinking. Xanax works quickly. And it's true; alprazolam is one of the more rapid-acting benzodiazepine compounds. With high lipophilicity and a relatively short half-life, it's cleared from your system in about four hours between the liver and redistribution to lipid tissue. Xanax is quick. But the only thing that fixes is the “problem” of not having an addiction to Xanax when you start. Because it's highly addictive. Xanax causes problems, not solutions. It may be quick, but it doesn't fix anything.

Buy Inessential Pharmacology. on amazon now (amazon affiliate link)

I could give you other examples. I could point out that Antipsychotic medications are all approved based on a 20% reduction in symptoms on the PANNS, which is hard to sell as a fixed to anything. Or that they cause tardive dyskinesia in 2 to 4% of patients yearly. Causing problems, not solving them.

I could go on and on. But I'm not going to. I've made my point incompletely. That's not totally satisfying, just like the effects of most of the oral medications in question. We are neither quick nor effective, so stop saying it. We're great at making money for pharmacies, benefits, managers, and pharmaceutical companies, and that's about it—a quick fix to what you want to fight with your partner about.

Thank you, my dear readers, and goodnight. Next time, consider going after laxatives. Those things cause a sense of urgency!

Share

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
3
8
2
Share
Previous
Next
