Title: Ask the Laws Of The House of God About Change Healthcare
URL: https://thefrontierpsychiatrists.substack.com/p/ask-the-laws-of-the-house-of-god
Source element: <article>
---
Ask the Laws Of The House of God About Change Healthcare
This sure seems prescient.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
MAR 26, 2024
∙ PAID
9
11
4
Share

The Frontier Psychiatrists is a daily health themed newsletter. Today, and homage to the “House Of God” by Samuel Shem.

Subscribed

The Fat Man's laws…

GOMERS don't die.

Starting with Emdeon (2014), with its billing and revenue cycle management services, Change indirectly supports the ongoing care and administrative management of chronic patients, including, but not limited to, GOMERS.

GOMERS go to ground.

With the acquisition of Altegra Health (2015): By McKesson before the formation of Change Healthcare, Altegra Health’s focus on population health management and risk adjustment could indirectly support efforts to identify patients at higher risk of falls and fractures, enabling targeted interventions for GOMERS who went to ground, reducing the risk of sentinel events for our partners.

At a cardiac arrest, the first procedure is to take your own pulse.

Change Healthcare Cardiology Hemodyanmics™ is the integrated hemodynamic monitoring system for cardiology departments that need to aggregate hemodynamic data, waveforms, and images in one cardiac patient record.

The patient is the one with the disease.

Transfer DRG—diagnostic reference group—Services is a reimbursement management solution for providers that want to leverage expertise and technology to identify underpayments tied to CMS’ Post-Acute Care Transfer rule, and recover associated revenue. With Change, not only do we know which patients have the disease, but with which primary DRG their admission is located, and how much was underpaid.

Placement comes first.

InterQual (2017): As part of its merger with McKesson Technology Solutions, Change Healthcare integrated InterQual’s evidence-based clinical decision support criteria, which healthcare providers could use to make informed decisions about which services optimize reimbursement given placement.

There is no body cavity that cannot be reached with a #14G needle and a good strong arm.

This may have been true in the past, but in the Change-Enabled future, Imaging guided-interventional procedures will be enabled with our Enterprise Radiology PACS System. Users can Optimize productivity with an AI-enabled enterprise radiology portfolio to streamline workflow, prioritize urgent studies, and expedite analysis.

Age + BUN = Lasix dose.

The pharmacy doesn't have to be so complicated! With Our Exchange Dx Solution, A pharmacy data management engine that enables non-technical users to transform, create, and share information in a self-service environment, including both weight-based dosing and custom rule sets, like “Age+BUN = Lasix Dose” if that is a standard of care in your setting for patients who require prompt diuresis without all the hassle of weight-based or renal function based calculations. With Change, good enough is here— now.

They can always hurt you more.

In a current class action lawsuit, it is alleged that Optum intimidated doctors who wanted to leave Optum to go to competing medical groups by using unlawful restrictions in the physicians’ contracts, and by threatening the physicians and competitors with legal action if the doctors moved to Optum’s competitors. Specifically, Emanate claims that Optum contracts with primary care physicians include post-employment non-competition and non-solicitation covenants, preventing providers from working for competing provider networks or health systems. Emanate states these post-employment restrictive covenants are void and unenforceable under California law.

Roy Basch's further laws

The only good admission is a dead admission.

Investments in telehealth and remote monitoring solutions, such as the capabilities expanded through the acquisition of companies like MD On-Line Inc. reduce unnecessary admissions by enhancing outpatient care.

If you don't take a temperature, you can't find a fever.

Change Healthcare offers Data Science as a Service A secure, hosted environment for payers, TPAs, and providers to build healthcare data science analytics using de-identified data from claims and other datasets with real-time regulatory compliance monitoring. This system was built for monitoring febrile illness like Covid -19, but after the blackcat attack, this service is still down.

Show me a BMS (Best Medical Student, a student at The Best Medical School) who only triples my work and I will kiss his feet.

Nothing about Change Healthcare increases physician workload. This law of the house of god is inapplicable.

If the radiology resident and the medical student both see a lesion on the chest x-ray, there can be no lesion there.

Change Healthcare Stratus Imaging Is a cloud-native enterprise imaging platform for providers who want to improve clinical and operational efficiencies via accessible, sharable, and secure imaging data. Change Healthcare Enterprise Imaging Network™ is now Change Healthcare Stratus Imaging. This is an improved name…and now that the services have been down for a month—there is no lesion there!

The delivery of good medical care is to do as much nothing as possible.

At change healthcare and its Optum parent company, we could not agree more.

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
9 Likes
∙
4 Restacks
9
11
4
Share
Previous
Next
