Curb Your Enthusiasm for Large Language Models
What Larry David could have taught AI developers
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
AUG 29, 2023
∙ PAID
8
3
Share

The under performance of large language models was predictable. An issue with large language models is that what we say, on the Internet, has an audience of other humans. Or at least had an audience of other humans.

The language was generated by one group of humans, and intended for other humans. There is an assumption built into our pre-ChatGPT communication: human minds will be interpreting what we read.

Subscribed

When humans are communicating with other humans, we have two methods with which to communicate. The first is the explicit words we use. The second is the implicit models of the minds of our readers, and their presumed reaction to the words.

We're almost always calculating these two things at once. Humans think about whatever we said, and whatever we meant. There is some assumption of plausibility of error built into the assumed understanding of others. Error is an understood risk to both the writer and the reader. This uncertainty forms the substrate of our communication. Humans get that other humans might not get it.

That is not what I meant!

Sometimes we use this for humor, sometimes we use that as a scam, sometimes we fret about whether misunderstanding will be the case, but the intentions behind the writing? This is crucially important for our understanding of any words. The language alone is insufficient.

Artificial intelligence decided to, more or less, ignore this.

They “scraped” all of our language, and built the predictive models about what word comes next.

These machines, built on words without intentions, are exceptionally good at lies. And fabrications, of course. Much of what we mean isn't in the words that we use. It's in our assumptions of the minds of others. Those are not on the printed page! There is an entire layer of “metadata,” which is deeply human, but implicit, and not written. The assumption behind extremely large data sets for large language models is that they were just figure it out. But they didn’t.

This metadata—what we meant—is absent. The robots didn't have access to it. So people spent billions of dollars scraping what we said, and ignoring the fact that what we meant was a crucial component of whatever we wrote in the first place.

I am going to use Larry David, and a conversation he had with his TV therapist, on the show Curb Your Enthusiasm, to make the point:

Therapist: “What is interesting to me is that I find you're focused on the number of women who apparently are very interested in you. And yet, Larry, you seem preoccupied.”

Larry: “I'm just wondering, have you ever noticed the disparity in these two chairs? Your chair is so much better than this one. This is not a comfortable chair at all. Did you buy these chairs?”

[if I was a Therapy supervisor, And this was real transcript from a session, I would have very different guidance for Junior therapists than I would if I understood the above was from a TV show which was making fun of psychotherapy.

The context really matters here, because either this is a session doing what sessions do, or it's an extremely well done satire of the process of psychotherapy, but those are opposite understandings! Robots just scraping the text would not know the difference. To laugh, or to cringe…]

Therapist: “ Yes, I bought both of them.”

Larry: “You picked out both of them out”

Therapist: “yeah.”

Larry: “What was going through your head when you picked out this chair? You picked out a great chair for yourself. That's a gorgeous chair. I would have that in my house. But this one, it's not comfortable. I'm constantly shifting from side to side. You have the comfortable chair. You have taken the good chair.”

[if this was a therapy session, I would be directing the trainee reviewing the video with me: “Larry may have some unconscious processes about the process of therapy. He is upset with what's happening in the session, and instead of focusing on the content of his life and the content of the psychotherapy, he's decided to focus on the chairs, their inequity, and attacked the therapist about them.”

There are a whole series of interactions I would recommend as a therapist. However, if the context is actually a scripted TV show, or even an improvised TV show, where the very process of psychotherapy is being satirized, there's really nothing I would change about it because it's spot on. It's really funny. It's either a predictively sad psychotherapy session where somebody is struggling with narcissism and not able to directly confront their issues…or is the TV show making fun of that very thing, in a way that I find quite helpful. And so I either have a recommendation, or no recommendation, depending on the context.]

Therapist: “That's interesting. You are the... The first and only patient who has ever said anything negative about that chair.”

Larry: “I don't find that interesting at all.”

[The actual context here is this is a joke. The audiences in on it, the characters are not.]

Therapist: “I do, and that's my job, to find things interesting. Interesting… with a chair.”

[this is the only part of this transcript that is so clearly written for TV that I think it stands out as not necessarily realistic therapy.

Larry, as a writer, breaks character a little bit in going this far, but it's also just hilarious. Again, if you're training a large language model, you're going to miss the fact that this is a joke, because it's not obviously different from the text itself.]

Larry: “I don't know what you're writing over there.”

Therapist: “Chair issues. I think there's something deeper.”

[Also really tongue-in-cheek satire, but plausible in some psychoanalytic contexts, which is what makes it funny]

Larry: “I don't think you're writing anything.”

Therapist: “I could show you.”

[I know this is a comedy TV show, but this is almost perfect example of what we call teleological mode, in mentalization-based Treatment psychotherapy. ]

Larry: “Huh?”

Therapist: “ I could show you.”

Larry: “You're a nice man, but do you do that much between you and me?”

Therapist: “Don't you think that I do a significant amount of help to you?”

Larry: “May I be honest with you?”

Therapist: “I hope that you can always be honest with me.”

Larry: “I'm often never honest with you…”

“I am often never honest with you” might as well be the unofficial slogan of LLMs today.

I hope the above training data proves useful.

Subscribed

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
8 Likes
∙
3 Restacks
8
3
Share
Previous
Next
