Don't Feed the Trolls: Substack's Content Moderation Punt Will Destroy the Platform.
Engagement with insincere interlocutors can and should be automated.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
MAY 07, 2023
∙ PAID
4
12
7
Share

I got to meet a troll. They do not only live under bridges! They also spend time on poorly moderated social media. Which includes the comment threads of Substack.

I have turned my experience into a don't feed the trolls cautionary tale, for the rest of us. For Substack Writers and Substack Reads? Becoming a Nazi bar is a problem. This is your official notice.

In summary, the argument is as follows:

But, then you realize that beyond spam and content that breaks the rules, you end up with malicious users who cause trouble. And trouble drives away users, advertisers, or both. And if you don’t deal with the malicious users, the malicious users define you. It’s the “oh shit, this is a Nazi bar now” problem.

And, look, sure, in the US, you can run the Nazi bar, thanks to the 1st Amendment. But running a Nazi bar is not winning any free speech awards. It’s not standing up for free speech. It’s building your own brand as the Nazi bar and abdicating your own free speech rights of association to kick Nazis out of your private property, and to craft a different kind of community. Let the Nazis build their own bar, or everyone will just assume you’re a Nazi too.

Hey, Chris Best — you're a terrible CEO. What follows is an annotated exploration of horrific contact moderation decisions that will destroy this company, and we don't even need to invoke literal Nazis, we just need to screenshot a child murderer enthusiast who decided to spend some time engaging with me on what was my actual birthday to provide some helpful feedback on my stance that children being shot with guns at unprecedented rates is happening.

Last night, a citizen journalist/underrated recording artist who goes by Mr. Raven decided to harass me about my article, in which I lament children being shot to death as the leading cause of death in children.

What follows is a trolls attempt to make a point, and my rapid iterative process of feeding trolls absurdity, because there's no meaningful engagement possible with those of bad will.

So, apparently the point this citizen scholar wanted to make is that pools are more fatal than guns. Now, I'm not here to argue that pools are safe. I do like making points about statistics. this desire to make any kind of point rapidly fell away.

So the first thing that's obvious is that trolls need to have some degree of theory of Mind Shitposting is fundamentally a task that involves engaging with the mind of someone else. The point is to generate surprise in the mind of your interlocutor.

This did not go well.

My article did two things:

1. pointed out a statistic as documented in the New England Journal of Medicine, that being shot to death is the leading cause of death in children.

2. nothing else.

I wasn’t wasn't trying to get into an argument about gun control. I was pointing out that there are a lot of guns and that there is no solution that involves trying to have a conversation about gun control because, well this gentleman was intent on proving that point.

Getting into a fight about whatever detail you can figure out …to get into a fight about is the modus operandi? Thus, my OK boomer joke fell on… limited ears.1

The whisper from the trees continued…

The ability to google facts about drowning was the ace in the hole for this gentleman. As was a point about the accuracy of any given demographic cited.

The material fact, at least my mind, is that someone is being shot to death. The demographic of 18 to 19 year olds being shot to death” asserts two concepts: age and cause of death. The relative importance of those two concepts is lost upon trolls.

Sarcasm is utterly and completely lost on trolls. Free speech isn't strictly speaking for you but there's a cost of capital associated with building the platform on which it can take place. Poor moderation is very, very expensive.

My attempt to bait this individual into revealing he's an idiot was a fabulous success. I felt empty. He was forced to Google bromide, of course. It was at this point that I understood there was no mind that could be engaged. I wasn't going to be able to make fun of him. I wasn't gonna be able to get him to make fun of himself anymore than he was already doing. Thusly, I followed my own advice from previous columns, and just defaulted to nonsense and absurdity.

My next move after you “Google and screenshot the definition of a word you don't know” is to post the first picture that I happen to have in my phone. OK, it's not precisely the first. It is Richard the III, former king of England, and noted Shakespearean villain. This Mr. Raven was not a Shakespeare fan. He did not understand that this picture was trolling him. Richard the III, of course, is famous for declaring himself not made for sport of tricks, and since you cannot prove a lover, he is determined to prove a villain. He’s history's most famous ugly loser who can't get laid.

This subtle historical jab was lost upon least fun sparring partner one could hope for.

So the next random picture I had was of Elizabeth Holmes.

He declared himself a computer programmer, and begs me to use words, because he doesn't know how to respond to random pictures from my phone. Good sir, I am not surprised, next, I just copy paste whatever text I have and have handy, which was from the New England Journal of Medicine.

He then decides to try to make another robust point.2

I fire back with a visual answer to why I am not busy engaging in more aggressively well tuned memes with this particular savvy operator:

And, by the way, I have never felt more seen than when accused of “obtuse cringe attempts at nerd humor.” And no, he does not know the word obtuse, so he got it a little bit wrong, which makes my meta-nerd humor point better than I ever could, of course.

Next is a the cover of stop making sense, an amazing album, but also what's happening right now:

He gets David Bowie, and a frog, and that's it. He has picked up on the term Ratioed (as in having a higher ratio of likes for a response than the initial post, but in this case it would've been pointless to point out that his 1 like divided by 0 likes is a math issue for the ages…)

Our public discourse is limited by the intellect and playbook with which is conducted. No arguments can be had with those acting in bad faith. I didn't want to bore you all with all of the screenshots, but essentially this person’s argument was that given there is no political will to generate a constitutional amendment that would regulate guns, we should all get OK with the fact that children are being endlessly murdered. The age range in which children are endlessly murdered by guns is the most important point that he could make. Which made the actual point of the original article:

The republican governor of the state in which x city/town is located spoke on the steps of the capital: “This senseless tragedy highlights how fragile life is, and how much we need to blame the mentally ill and the broken system that cannot proactively identify them and target them with suppressive fire from the nearly 400,000,000 current firearms deployed throughout the United States.”

This time, clearly, given the scope of the tragedy, it will be different, and meaningful change is definitely going to happen thanks to the actions of brave lawmakers representing this locality.

I regret to inform you the obtuse nerd humor is going to continue unabated. You're not the intended audience, dear trolls.

And a quote from Puscifer’s “the remedy”:

—Owen Scott Muir, M.D.

The Frontier Psychiatrists feeds the trolls so you don't have to.

Subscribed
1

It also worth noting if you think Twitter is the home of shitlibs, then sub stack might have a significant problem with content moderation?

2

about the time at which the CDC updated various unrelated guides related to drowning versus general injury and death among children.

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
4 Likes
∙
7 Restacks
4
12
7
Share
Previous
Next
