Title: Essential Oils for Depression: Yes, Really
URL: https://thefrontierpsychiatrists.substack.com/p/essential-oils-for-depression-yes
Source element: <article>
---
Essential Oils for Depression: Yes, Really
A Masterclass in clinical trial design
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
APR 03, 2024
∙ PAID
5
1
Share

The Frontier Psychiatrists is a Health-themed newsletter. I did not think I would be writing a piece explaining an amazing study about essential oils. One of the nice things about science? I was surprised. To be clear, the study I'm about to describe to you does not describe a breakthrough treatment for depression. It describes an effective and tolerable treatment for mild depression that is a little bit better than placebo and compares well to Zoloft— in a study not powered to show that difference. What the authors do, remarkably well, is design a clinical trial that can do something remarkable: prove, to the satisfaction of this grumpy author, that treatment based on an essential oil of lavender is an active agent in the treatment of major depressive disorder. And, to my surprise, they demonstrated it in one of the hardest cohorts to demonstrate anything in mild depression!

Mild depression is not hard to treat. Mild depression is easy to treat. Almost anything will get mild depression a little better. Thus, it is remarkable to do a study in this very hard-to-research condition.

Without further ado, I will walk you through a masterpiece of research study design, and will all come out smelling like a flower, although not a rose, in the end.1

Lavender oil preparation Silexan is effective in mild-to-moderate major depression: a randomized, placebo- and reference-controlled trial

My readers are savvy by this point, I've hammered into you repeatedly the crucial nature of evaluating Table One. Table one is not laid out in the way that I like. However, I will include it below.

My readers will recall that the point of looking at table one is to make sure the randomization succeeded. There should be no statistical differences between the study groups. I've spent time in the newsletter explaining how to look at the differences between two groups before, and this study includes three. But don't worry, we're not supposed to compare all three of them. I'll explain as we go along!

In the second half of Table One, more non-differences!

The authors did an extremely good job enrolling the Study. The population isn't different from each other, which means the randomization succeeded, and they are as mildly impaired as they sought in the aims of the study.

This must've taken forever!

Everybody who tried to sign up for the trial and had severe depression? Screened out:

The trial was conducted between October 2020 and April 2023 in 53 general and psychiatric or neurological practices in Germany and Poland. A total of 577 subjects were screened for eligibility. Of these, 500 subjects were randomized, 498 were treated, and 446 (90.6% of 500) completed the study as scheduled (Fig. 1). Two subjects who were randomized but not treated had been assigned to placebo; one was lost to follow-up and the other revoked the informed consent. Withdrawal rates were similar in all treatment groups.

It took three years to find that many people with mild depression!

The compliance assessment does raise an eyebrow for me, but that's because I know way too much about Compliance numbers, thanks to my work with Dr. Anthony Sterns at iRxReminder.

To be clear, I think the study subjects were lying to the researchers, not the researchers lying to us, but I don't believe these Compliance numbers:

Based on tablet counting, the average treatment compliance for the period between baseline and the week 8 visit was 99.1% ± 6.4% for silexan, 98.6% ± 4.9% for sertraline, and 99.1% ± 5.7% for placebo (compliance outside a range of 80–120% was accounted for as an intercurrent event).

They weren't different between groups, which is what matters for this kind of trial. Research subjects lie to researchers to keep them happy just as much as patients lie to their doctors in clinical practice if not more. The real rates are compliance are vastly lower, here is a podcast I did on that topic.

They do an excellent job of reporting adverse effects:

The investigators observed 92 potentially treatment-related events in 56 subjects (32.9%) in the silexan group, 91 events in 49 subjects (28.7%) in the sertraline group, and 69 events in 43 subjects (27.4%) in the placebo group. Serious adverse events (any causal relationship) were observed in five subjects for silexan (2.9%), in six for sertraline (3.5%), and in four for placebo (2.6%). Two subjects in each group reported suicidal ideation. All other serious events occurred only once.

this is the point at which I mentioned the difference between two research concepts:

Treatment-emergent adverse effects (TEAEs) is a term we use to denote anything bad that happens that is a result—even plausibly—of the treatment protocol.

Serious adverse effects (SAEs) are bad things that are a result of the treatment protocol.

If you're doing clinical trial research, you need to be scrupulous about both of these.

These end up on FDA labels, and guide doctors in providing information to their patients about what to expect! Keep a close eye on the rates of adverse effects in the Zoloft group, which we will address the inclusion next, but you will notice there are similar rates of adverse effects in other trials including this drug.

The most frequent potentially related events in the silexan group were eructation (28 subjects, 16.5%) and nasopharyngitis (6, 3.5%). For sertraline, the most frequent events were headache (11, 6.4%), nausea (8, 4.7%), and diarrhea (7, 4.1%). All other potentially related events were observed in less than 3% of subjects in the silexan or sertraline group.

Fourteen subjects in the silexan group (8.2%), 14 in the sertraline group (8.2%) and 7 in the placebo group (4,5%) terminated treatment prematurely for lack of efficacy or for intolerability. The results of the physical and ECG examinations, vital signs and routine laboratory measures were comparable in all treatment groups.

The side effects for this new drug, which is lavender oil extract, or more common, but more mild than Zoloft, and more common than placebo, which has a range of mild adverse effects reported in any study.

The reason they included Zoloft wasn't to compare lavender oil extract to Zoloft. It was included for assay sensitivity. I'm going to define that term.

The concept of assay sensitivity allows us to determine whether a negative result is a result of poor triazine and poor enrollment versus whether the drug didn't work. Here's how the concept plays out in practice. We know, from a variety of other clinical trials, that Zoloft is an active agent in depression. It's included in this trial such that if Zoloft doesn't have a placebo, which in any placebo-controlled trial of Zoloft we would expect to see, we know the trial design failed. If our investigational compound does not beat the placebo on its own, and we have no control for essay sensitivity, we don't know if we just enrolled an inappropriate trial sample. They could've been too sick, or not sick enough, or something. If if Zoloft doesn't beat placebo, we have a problem with the Study. In this study, Zoloft beat the placebo. Our active lavender extract candidate beat the placebo. So we know that, as a check on common sense, the study worked.

What this study design does not allow us to do, because it's not powered to do so, make any conclusions about the relative efficacy of Zoloft and lavender extract with relationship to each other. It's tempting to compare them, but don't do that. There are too few people in the study to show a difference between those agents, and any comparison is not scientifically valid with two small samples to show a difference. It is to check our assumptions, not to measure success or failure against them.

And Lo, lavender oil was an active treatment for mild to moderate depression!

Here's what the results look like:

It's like authors of studies know I'm going to be writing about them! They include response and remission groups! I'm tickled pink. Let's look at the change in depression rating scales over time.

Imagining my readers might want a version with commentary, here it is, it just covers up most of the graph!

There we have it. Patients with mild moderate depression were enrolled in the trial and were given one of three compounds, a placebo, a lavender oil extract, and 50 mg of Zoloft. The lavender oil beat the placebo! Zoloft also beat placebo, as we expected, and all is right with the world.

This is a very well-designed study that demonstrates something that we wouldn't expect. The more a result challenges our expectations, the better the study design needs to be to convince skeptics like myself. This is the kind of study that inspires me to write more so that more studies can be designed by people who meet this kind of high standard.

The Lavender Award for unexpectedly excellent study design? Maybe that's a thing now.

Thanks for reading, everybody!

Subscribed

Please, if you're reading this newsletter, it's a lot of work, I read it every day, and you should become a paid subscriber. Because I find that validating. It encourages me to write more of these, and I take requests for topics!

It's also worth noting I offer organization-wide discounts on the subscription, so if you're like Heading Health, for example, and you want all of the members of your team To have the kind of excellent science education pumped into their inboxes daily —shoot me an email, and will make it happen. I'm thrilled that the heading health prescribers are going to be readers of the newsletter, and I hope their patients will benefit as well!

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

1

Kasper, S., Volz, HP., Möller, HJ. et al. Lavender oil preparation Silexan is effective in mild-to-moderate major depression: a randomized, placebo- and reference-controlled trial. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-024-01783-2

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
5 Likes
∙
1 Restack
5
1
Share
Previous
Next
