Getting Audio into Clubhouse Part 2
The Slightly More complicated world of the iRig 2
THE FRONTIER PSYCHIATRISTS
JUN 23, 2021
∙ PAID
5
1
Share

Welcome to the second in our series covering ways to get audio into Social Audio Apps like Clubhouse and Greenroom.

Today, we will cover the iRig 2 by IK Multimedia.

Why do we want to do this? Well, let’s assume you want sounds other than your voice coming directly Into your phone to be routed to your social audio app…

But you don't just want to put your phone up to a speaker on an amp? Well, this sounds like a job for the iRig 2*

*note, due to the non-class compliant nature of the programing of the clubhouse app, as noted in our part one post, where we reviewed the IK MicCast2, the ability to get any external audio into CH is a non-trivial issue given the need for a variety of very specific steps lest you crash the ability to have external audio plus more than one person speaking on stage.

Without further delay, the how to guide!

We start with a familiar acquisition: the iPhone 1/8” to lightning dongle:

1 piece of advice: if you purchase one of these, purchase 5. They are not engineered for robust reliability and thus can and do “go bad” with some regularity, and you don’t want your entire room concept to die cause the one dongle you had went south.

Now, step 2: Examining the iRig 2:

This $39 dollar plastic marvel has pictures of a guitar, headphones, and and amp. HOWEVER, the guitar is the symbol for us that stands for “all audio from the outside world.” The headphones are headphones. the Amp logo (next to the built in short 1/8” out jack) we are gonna skip for now.

so…the hookup:

Plug the iRig 2 into the dongle…it' feels like we can do this, right?

Next Step:

Plus the lighting adapter into your iPhone. EASY.

And then…

you will notice big jack for 1/4” Audio input and mini Jack for 1/8” headphone input.

so we plug headphones like these…

Headphones go in little one!

Making Progress! Feels good. Now we need external audio, and we will assume for the sake of argument that you want all your audio to be in the form of a Mono/Poly Synth…

Not that anyone will do this, but the point is, this device has an output…that is a 1/4” “TS” cable output…

AKA a regular guitar cable.

So we plug from the output on SOUND OUT device (in this case a keyboard, but can be a mixer, anything that we can plug a 1/4” jack into)….into the input on the iRig 2:

We will recall from the prior guide, you need to download the IK multimedia Mic room app for the ability to monitor your source:

But once this is installed you can monitor on the headphones plugged into the iRig 2.

Now the Audio from your SOUND OUT (in this case a keyboard) is going to play on clubhouse when you play it.

You will note: there is no mic input with this particular setup…because synthesizers are not microphones. If you want to plug a microphone in, you’d have the preamp or mixer out plug in THE SAME WAY as the synthesizer.

Hope this was helpful! Feel free to let us know!

—Owen Muir, M.D.

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
5
1
Share
Previous
Next
