I Explained Healthcare to My Mom...
And she did not like it?
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
JUL 14, 2023
∙ PAID
4
2
Share

I explain the mess of pharmacy to my mother last night. My mother is in her 80s, but runs a not for profit for 40+ years. She has employees who she struggles to provide health insurance for.

When I explain to her, what a PBM was, and how it works with pharmacies, insurance, companies, etc., she asked a very simple question:

“Why aren’t these people in jail?”

Here is the real masterstroke from the hackers advocating for fiduciary responsibility standards…

Paying More Than Required is Not Fiduciary Behavior

There is no world in which it is in keeping with your fiduciary duty to pay more for drugs when you could pay less.

There’s no world in which having your employees have endlessly increasing premiums is good for them.

There is no world in which the demonstrable absence of ERISA Compliance in any plan has ever been evaluated is in keeping with your fiduciary duty.

It’s a TRAP…to not comply with Tax Law!

The maximum wait time for behavioral health appointment under ACA and thus ERISA is 10 days.

The average wait time to see a therapist for a child in America is 48 days.

For more severe problems, it’s longer.

And so I think we’re going to see is that every employer is either going to have to be suing their health plan for this information or they’re open themselves up to liability for not doing so.

The Frontier Psychiatrists
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. writes things about health and its care.
By Owen Muir, author
ERISA is Labor Law and Tax Law

Furthermore, once one of these lawsuits wins for one type of claim, every lawyer, everywhere is going to be bringing the same easy to prove claim against every other plan sponsor, or on behalf of every other plan sponsor, against their broker, or with the broker against their plan, depending on who is willing to get out of the way of the wrecking ball first.

And I, for one, think the best business model …is popcorn to crunch for the show.

American “payers” built completely unaffordable scam health insurance. They also created the financial incentives for private equity to destroy American healthcare, destroy physicians, destroy income, destroy real companies, and destroy any sense we will be taken care of if we get sick. They deserve everything they get.

Don’t forget that Big Payer Venture Arms drive private equity acquisitions. Every PE firm is just rolling stuff up so Big Health will acquire it later.

Proficimus More Irretenti,

—Owen Scott Muir, M.D.

Subscribed

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
4 Likes
∙
2 Restacks
4
2
Share
Previous
Next
