THE LORD OF LIABILITY
Incident Report: Problematic 1:1 Meeting between Lord of the Nazgûl and the Mouth of Sauron
The problems kept coming...what did Sauron know and when did he know it?
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
APR 19, 2023
∙ PAID
5
Share

To: Senior Management, Humanoid Resources, Compliance Department Date: April 13, The Third Age

Dear Colleagues,

I am writing to report a concerning incident—to say the least— that took place during a recent 1:1 meeting. The 1:1 included the Lord of the Nazgûl and the Mouth of Sauron. This was, of course, as part of our theoretical peer reviews in keeping with our semiannual 360s. I feel compelled to bring this matter to your attention. In my role as the literal voice of the lord of Mordor, Sauron himself, if feel it important for me to speak up when there is a risk to our culture of cooperation and collegiality. Speaking up on behalf of the lord of fire and shadow is literally the only job I have here.

Summary of the Incident:

During the 1:1 meeting, the following problematic events occurred:

The Lord of the Nazgûl displayed an aggressive and hostile attitude towards the Mouth of Sauron, repeatedly interrupting and belittling him.

The Mouth of Sauron, in turn, became distressed and attempted to express his concerns. An invalidating and dismissive communication style—marked by micro aggression—was employed by the Lord of the Nazgûl.

The meeting devolved into a heated argument with personal attacks and threats, resulting in an unproductive and less than inclusive environment. Neither individual seemed ready to give Mordor 110%

Potential Consequences:

If left unaddressed, this incident could have several negative consequences for our organization, including:

The deterioration of the working relationship between key members of our organization potentially leading to the badness.

A negative impact on morale could reduce productivity and job satisfaction among team members.

The potential for the escalation of conflict between the involved parties like the Witch King could further disrupt operations and impact our organization's ability to achieve its ambitions on Q3 goals..

Recommended Actions:

In order to address this incident and prevent future occurrences, I recommend the following actions be taken:

Conduct an impartial investigation into the incident to gather additional information and determine the appropriate course of action.

Offer mediation and conflict resolution support for the Lord of the Nazgûl and the Mouth of Sauron encourage a resolution of their differences.

Organize team-building activities and workshops to foster better communication, understanding, and cooperation among team members. Zip lines and high rope walks are popular, as would be an escape room.

Review and reiterate the organization's code of conduct, it is about compliance.

I trust that this matter will be treated with the seriousness it deserves and that the necessary steps will be taken to ensure a positive and respectful working environment for all members of our organization especially wraith lords.

Thank you for your attention to this important matter.

Sincerely,

Shelob,

SVP, Humanoid Resources,

Mordor, Inc.

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
5 Likes
5
Share
Previous
Next
