Title: It’s the End of Telehealth as We Know It: Update!
URL: https://thefrontierpsychiatrists.substack.com/p/its-the-end-of-telehealth-as-we-know-92b
Source element: <article>
---
It’s the End of Telehealth as We Know It: Update!
More updates from field reporters on DEA enforcement of controlled substance prescribing
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
OCT 19, 2022
∙ PAID
2
Share

Dear readers, after the unambiguous and thrilling success of my last article on the topic, I have an update on the status of DEA regulatory efforts! Now, in states other than New York!

This “hit single” will be released a bit later to my free subscribers as well!

A correspondent in the state of Tennessee provides the following update on his encounter with the drug enforcement administration:

I just had a DEA visit!!

It was a crazy coincidence since I'm normally not in the office and they happened to come by the same day.

I told them that I assumed they had come by multiple times and just caught me now (like the Jehovah's Witnesses (no offense to any JWs in the crowd)), but they said this was their first try!

They wanted to know three things:

1) Is this a real office where in-person visits can take place for Ryan Haight purposes? (Yes.)

2) Do I store any controlled substances here? (No.)

3) Do I keep medical records here? (Also, no.)

And that was it!

If either of my answers to 2 or 3 above were “Yes.”, the visit would have been a bit more complicated.

—TN, MD

So, to recap, my conclusions from the initial article seem to be holding up! In states other than New York, the DEA continues to flex its regulatory muscle, and perform in-person evaluations of existing prescriber addresses. This is actually a step beyond what I imagined to be the minimal case in my initial article! Not only are DEA in-person inspections applying to new license holders, but agents are coming to inspect the licenses and physical practice locations of these new license holders as well. They are having drop-in examinations to make sure they can—and really do— prescribe medication on site.

It appears that “records location” is now a question they ask, which is more in keeping with a world of electronic health records.

With apologies to R.E.M. …

That’s great… it starts with an in person evaluation…

Agents and enforcement and airplanes

Compliance is not just OK

Eye of a regulator

Listen to your cash burn

Evaluate the risk

Profile in the right light

It’s the end of telehealth as we know it, it’s the end of telehealth as we know it, it’s the end of telehealth as we know it, and I feel…

fined?

—O. Scott Muir, M.D.

Subscribed

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
2
Share
Previous
Next
