Jedi-Level Personalized Dosing of Lamotrigine (Lamictal) in Bipolar Disorder
A practical guide to a commonly misunderstood drug.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
APR 17, 2023
∙ PAID
11
9
1
Share

As a child and adult psychiatrist with some expertise in bipolar disorder, not to mention being a person who also has bipolar disorder, people regularly ask me questions about the dosing medications for this condition.

I did kind of asked for it, in that I wrote a whole piece about Lithium dosing. So I decided to pull back the curtain on the next “super specialized” psychopharmacology trick in my bipolar disorder management strategy, which is a clever work around figuring out what dosage of Lamictal (Lamotrigine) might be helpful to which person.

Lamotrigine was developed initially as a treatment for epilepsy. As we now understand, from the work of physician-scientists like Chris Palmer M.D., both epilepsy and bipolar disorder can be understood as metabolic disorders.

“Not only do mental disorders have strong bidirectional relationships with one another, many metabolic and neurological disorders also have strong bidirectional relationships with mental disorders. These relationships provide important clues about the nature of the common pathway that will help us solve the puzzle of mental illness.”1

Lamotrigine is primarily understood to function thusly:

Lamotrigine is a member of the sodium channel blocking class of antiepileptic drugs.[68] This may suppress the release of glutamate and aspartate, two dominant excitatory neurotransmitters in the central nervous system.[3] It is generally accepted to be a member of the sodium channel blocking class of antiepileptic drugs,[69] but it could have additional actions, since it has a broader spectrum of action than other sodium channel antiepileptic drugs such as phenytoin and is effective in the treatment of the depressed phase of bipolar disorder, whereas other sodium channel-blocking antiepileptic drugs are not, possibly on account of its sigma receptor activity.

The sigma receptor regulates gene translation into proteins in the rough endoplasmic reticulum of the cell, and thus impacts myriad changes beyond just “cells firing less” by sodium channel blockade.

Lamotrigine is understood as a “mood stabilizer.” Here is data from a study published in JAMA on its use compared to lithium and placebo:

Most of the Lamotrigine reduction in mood episodes was driven, in that sample, by less relapse to depression. The FDA approval reads:

It may also be used as maintenance treatment in patients with bipolar disorder to help delay the occurrence of mood episodes such as depression, mania, or hypomania.

Now, the dosing super tricks you have all been waiting for…

Lamotrigine is often under-dosed in patients with bipolar disorder. One can check a blood level, as one does in patients with epilepsy.

The trough levels—as measurable 12 hours after a PM dose in epilepsy—are defined therapeutically as between 5 and 15 micrograms/mL.

Lamotrigine is processed through glucuronidation, generally thought of a second pass metabolism. This is regulated through UGT1A1 genes and the proteins they code for.

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

Just as humans have rapid metabolizer variations in the liver’s cytochrome P450 system, we additionally have UGT1A1 Variants types with “gain of function” mutations. In non science speak, some people’s bodies burn through Lamotrigine quickly.

The way of testing this is a little bit clunky, but it's pretty reliable— and cheap! One can draw a peak lamotrigine blood level! To define this, the patient is directed take their dose in the morning. One hour—and no more—later they get a lamotrigine blood level drawn.

Remember, these blood levels are normed for trough levels. So if what you find is that, when drawn, the patient has a five or lower level—only one hour after ingesting a dose, not 12 hours after the dose—what we know is that such a patient is processing this faster than most people with epilepsy process the drug. This epilepsy cohort is most of the people who’ve taken the drug and gotten blood levels drawn, so that the group that recommended dosing strategies are based on.

If the result shows a very low peak level, it stands to reason that the patient is a rapid metabolizer. In those cases, a higher dose is eminently reasonable, because her body is clearing lamotrigine rapidly.

These levels are not a guide to “clinical blood levels” in bipolar disorder, as those have not been established.

The risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome is mostly based on other genetic variants, largely in the HLA genes. Stephens-Johnson Syndrome, the life-threatening rash that every doctor learns to worry about, is a very rare event.

So that is my strategy! Instead of just going with 200 mg because somebody decided that was the right dose, get a measurement. Since we don't have to find levels in bipolar disorder, the measurement we get is to determine if a person is metabolizing the drug at a much more rapid than expected rate. The way we know this is by using the establish trough levels in epilepsy, 5-15, and add a little bit of logic: if somebody has levels lower than most people would have after 12 hours after only one hour, they can safely tolerate more medicine!

That's my personalized approach to dosing Lamotrigine, and I hope it's helpful to physicians, nurse practitioners, physicians assistance, and patients alike! A gracious acknowledgment to Dr. Howard Green, a mentor who taught me this approach.

—Owen Scott Muir, M.D.

The Frontier Psychiatrists is fun, and sometimes directive, when it comes to the science of your health!

Subscribed

1

Brain Energy: A Revolutionary Breakthrough in Understanding Mental Health--and Improving Treatment for Anxiety, Depression, OCD, PTSD, and More by Christopher M. Palmer MD

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
11 Likes
∙
1 Restack
11
9
1
Share
Previous
Next
