Notes: Will We Manifest Hysterical Realism new-Twitter?
A new place to post things so that you inbox doesn't hate me.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
APR 12, 2023
∙ PAID
4
2
Share

I just published my 7th note on Substack Notes, and would find it amusing if you joined me with the rest of the people who were previously promoting their substack on Twitter. Like, for example, this winner of a post:

Owen Scott Muir, M.D.
Apr 11, 2023

I also posted about this on LinkedIn, because it's one of the best formatted arguments a ride in a really long time. It doesn't matter what you think of the argument, he uses Substack to make it, excellent typography, just great decision making throughout. It's a newsletter masterpiece of rhetoric.

The Hartmann Report
What Do Pornography, Ginni Thomas, & Thomas Jefferson Have In Common?

Notes is a new space on Substack for us to share links, short posts, quotes, photos, and more. I plan to use it for things that don’t fit in the newsletter, like most of my newsletter. According to my Grammarly, I use more unique words than most! Talk about measuring what matters!

Maybe it will be a place for sass. Things that are too sassy. I definitely need a place for sassy things. It's going to clean up your inbox from the likes of me.

Go to Notes

How to join

Head to substack.com/notes or find the “Notes” tab in the Substack app. As a subscriber to The Frontier Psychiatrists , you’ll automatically see my notes. Feel free to like, reply, or share them around!

You can also share notes of your very own. I ardently hope this becomes a space where every reader of The Frontier Psychiatrists can share thoughts, ideas, and promote our newsletters shamelessly in a way prevented by other platforms that won’t be named. We are building personal brands! And shoring up the a16z portfolio at the same time.

If you encounter any issues, you can always refer to the Notes FAQ for assistance.

I am looking forward to getting LinkedIn levels of engagement with you, dear readers, Right Here on notes!

Go to Notes

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
4 Likes
4
2
Share
Previous
Next
