LinkedIn Unlocked: Discover How I "Skyrocketed" My Engagement Rate to 7.7%!
Yes, really.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
APR 02, 2023
∙ PAID
4
2
3
Share

My readers may have noticed I started posting more on LinkedIn recently. And writing more. Y’all might wonder: how does Owen do it? Does it even work? Why do you do what you do?!?

The “good” engagement rate benchmark on LinkedIn is 2%. I am at 7.7% over the last month and growing followers at 4.4% a week—every week.

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

The rest of the article will go into exquisite detail on my LinkedIn engagement “strategy:”impressions, growth, individual post analysis, and the relationship between LinkedIn and my newsletter. I will show you (in)exactly how I did that! What worked and what didn’t.

First, some practical details.

I spent zero dollars.

I did it all by myself.

I didn’t use ChatGPT to write content.

Nothing was automated.

Also:

It wasn’t a strategy, per se.

I read nothing about how LinkedIn works before writing this article now.

I don't really have anything to sell, other than maybe subscriptions to a newsletter?

The newsletter is not huge, but has a niche readership, as reflected in the LinkedIn data I'll share.

My process was— I just followed metrics and acted in ways that were grossly rewarded. I look to see if my engagement was up or down, and made sure it kept going up.

I am not a marketer. I’m a physician who is also an absurdist writer. I wasn't super interested by how any content did on LinkedIn, and didn't pay much attention until recently. On March 15th, I decided to look:

Well, I thought, that's intriguing! I didn't know if this was good or not good. I just knew it was better every week. I thought, “wow that is a lot of impressions.” Maybe I should follow these numbers…

LinkedIn lets you look at 365/90/28/14/7 day windows across followers, impressions, and engagement. We can look at these on a per post basis and on an aggregate basis.

I didn’t bother with LinkedIn much a year ago. Here is engagements:

And here are followers:

As an unsophisticated physician in health-tech circles, I follow scalable outcomes. It looks like followers were growing.

One of those posts—as we can see above—is a wild outlier. Let’s take a look at thar most “successful” post:

This is a deeply personal post. Personal material on LinkedIn wins. I’ll say more about this, of course. But first I had to look up terms:

Engagement - Any measurable interactions with your posted social content such as shares, comments, likes, and clicks

Clicks - The total number of times a piece of content has been clicked on or watched (LinkedIn collapses a lot a post so you can't read them unless you click to expand, which counts as engagement)

Shares

Likes

Comments

Follows

Impressions - The total number of times a piece of content has been viewed (this can include multiple views by the same user scrolling past)

Total Engagement = clicks/plays + shares + likes + comments + follows

Let's calculate total engagement on this post:

Impressions were 18,383, and, at the time I had 2500 followers or so. So the post was seen by 7.36x my follower count.

My follows went up on day one of that post:

It went up by 25, so the shares+likes+comments+follows = 242.

Here are the 3 ways one can calculate engagement:

1) Engagement Rate = Total Engagements/Followers

Followers are those individuals whom your post could potentially be directly exposed to. This type of calculation measures engagement on a per follower basis.

Pros: Easy to calculate; follower base quality assessment.

Cons: Non-follower engagement is not taken into account.

2) Engagement Rate = Total Engagements/Reaches

Reaches refer to the number of individuals that you post is exposed to. This type of calculation measures engagement on a per individual basis.

Pros: Post quality assessment

Cons: Impression frequency is not taken into consideration

3) Engagement Rate = Total Engagements/Impressions

This measures engagement on a per view/display basis.

Pros: Useful metric for measuring cost per thousand (CPM)

Cons: Variable frequency can lead to inconsistent results (impression = reach x frequency).

The rub is that LinkedIn doesn’t give out reach numbers! You get impressions only. The difference is as follows:

Impressions: Impressions represent the total number of times a post has been displayed in users' feeds, —each time it appears in their feed will count as an impression.

Reach: this refers to the number of unique users who have seen your content.

Reach can be estimated thusly:

Estimate the reach of the post by using the following formula:

Estimated Reach = (Views) + (Average Views per Like * Likes) + (Average Views per Comment * Comments) + (Average Views per Share * Shares)

Which frankly seems like a lot of work.

So on the above top performing post, we get the following calculations:

Method 1: 9.6% (engagements/followers)

Method 2: I can’t even bother. Maybe a marketer will comment and tell me an easy way to do this.

Method 3: 1.3% (engagements/impressions)

This was of course a deeply personal post that ended up getting a lot of impressions a garnered new followers. But it wasn’t paid promotion of content. So at a cost of $0 it’s an infinitely valuable post on a CPM basis, but on a cost per heartbreaking reality of the loss of my sister basis, it’s about right.

The newsletter post on which this was based performed thusly on its homepage:

The article I didn’t post with the LinkedIn post. I posted it a few a months in the comments. But it was a LinkedIn post > newsletter conversion.

Breaking it down, beyond the deeply personal nature which readers found engaging, here is what I can tell:

It was LinkedIn native content. There are no links off LinkedIn on the post. It was career relevant (about suicide prevention, on suicide prevention day, by a psychiatrist who specializes in suicide prevention) and it linked internally to others on LinkedIn in the post. It was relevant, engaged with, shared, and I was followed by more people because of it.

It did preposterously better than my newsletter post in terms of readership, ever.

A plausible theory would be the engagement fed views, and the views fed engagement, and that was why it performed as well as it did. Maybe the personal nature was the key? It’s a surprise to see deeply personal items on LinkedIn, perhaps? Let’s look at a few other top performers from me, and see if the assessment holds up?:

Here are the other highest engagement posts:

Highest engagement posts

And here are the lowest performing of the high engagement posts:

The overlap between high engagement and high impressions is not 1:1…

The top impressions and then most engaged with are the same:

Of note, all my high impression and high engagement posts were about deeply relevant content (in which I am an expert) and being vulnerable—it’s about suicide prevention and my personal relationship with the content. It is self-disclosure and heart strings. Of note, readers have a choice to engage, whereas impressions are algorithm driven.

However, the other high impression posts do not overlap perfectly with highest engagement posts:

High impressions posts

So high-ish impression posts are getting seen by less than my total followers (1000ish out of 3500 or so).

My lame-ish high impression posts do poorly on all metrics (Less engagement than followers or impressions than 2%) individually. However, on an aggregate basis, I am still left with an extremely high engagement rate overall.

Let’s look at one particularly my engagement post, recently:

Again, I'm a psychiatrist who specializes in suicide prevention, and this is an article about how hospitals are not good when it comes to suicide prevention, but hammering home the point that readers of mine LinkedIn find content about suicide prevention worth engaging with. Given the mental health community likely to be connected to me, this makes sense.

Share

On my newsletter, this post performed very well also:

As of this writing, I have under 1700 subscribers, so even on my newsletter, it's getting viewed to by more people that I have subscribers. There was a lot of activity on the actual newsletter itself, with 25 new subscribers. This is high for any article of mine. Of note, only 121 of the views came from LinkedIn.

Essentially, it generated a lot of conversation on LinkedIn. I drove some traffic to the newsletter. People who then went to the newsletter tended to subscribe to the newsletter after reading a piece that was pretty data heavy, but made a strong argument. It was about the popular topic that I post about. It surprises me that it is not articles about Cerebral that win LinkedIn, but instead articles about suicide prevention.

Megan Cornish recently wrote about using AI for LinkedIn posting about mental health related topics and share the following conclusion:

There are certain things that can only come from a human, like true stories that connect with the heart of the issue, incredible metaphors, and emotions.

I don't use a AI to write any of my posts, even the ones where I am writing about generative AI. Mostly because I think generative AI is a bad writer at this point. But I think her take away points about the kinds of things humans are good at is born out by the kinds of posts they got the most engagement that I did. They are things that are human: issues of the heart, and deeply personal emotions.

POLL
What is Your LinkedIn Strategy?
Post endlessly and hope
50%
Post only once a day
50%
Paid post promotion
0%
React to others posts only
0%
In it for bot dating opportunities
0%
POLL CLOSED

Even when a human is writing those things, they do better than human written posts that are not about deeply emotionally impactful writing.

The LinkedIn algorithm does not show your post to most of your followers, you have to earn it. Here is one example of that phenomenon:

This was an “OK enough” post that only 305 people saw, and nine people reacted to, and it had a link to my newsletter in the body of the post. So maybe the algorithm didn't show it to a lot of people, nobody reposted it, etc. It just wasn't very popular.

On the newsletter itself, that same article was actually pretty popular:

A 46% open rate is pretty good for a newsletter I am told, according to one source:

A good email open rate should be between 17-28%, depending on the industry you’re in. While knowing these numbers is a great starting point, it’s worth it to look into your specific industry averages and compare your metrics with those in your specific industry.

And the average in Healthcare is 23% for email marketing. So a relatively strong newsletter, about a topic with relatively low relevance to my role as a physician, how to write more, did extremely well as a newsletter article, but did not do well on LinkedIn when it came to the algorithm itself—it wasn't showing to that many people—but was engaged with at a relatively high rate of 5% on LinkedIn.

Among my more popular all-time newsletter articles are those about Cerebral, and those similarly did well on LinkedIn:

Which had the following engagement metrics:

73 engagements! Looking at its performance on the newsletter itself:

Notably, this article was written on 23rd of December, right before Christmas. My newsletter got more views that day (compared to any other post ever) has “taken off”ever since then:

And putting that growth into the broader context of the newsletter, here is what the numbers look like since I started writing, on a daily visit basis:

And here are the top referral sources and their conversion rates to subscribers:

I started writing this newsletter 274 days ago.

In that same past year, I grew the subscriber-ship to 1671 as of today.

In a similar timeframe on LinkedIn? It is very difficult to actually figure out what your rate of growth is absent doing some significant math.

Give a gift subscription

The newsletter itself has gotten something like 197,000 page views in the past 274 days, which ends up being 718 page views is a day.

In a 365 day timeframe, I have generated 285k impressions on LinkedIn, which is 780 impressions a day.

When it comes to growth in impressions per day, LinkedIn is really killing it: my daily average is now 1900 daily impressions. This is a of course less than my number of followers, highlighting how the algorithm does not show everything you do to everyone follows you yet again.

The newsletter, on the other hand, with under 1700 subscribers, and his daily viewership just under the number of subscribers on average, but sometimes many more:

In taking a look at any referred traffic:

We can see that linkedin actually is a laggard. Now, I tweet a lot, but I don't post anything on Facebook. I hate Facebook. I haven't even logged into Facebook in two weeks or more.

But even with 1900+ daily impressions on LinkedIn, and 13,000+ of the course the past week, that only translated into 228 click through from LinkedIn to the newsletter.

The click-through rate is relatively low (1.7%). It is not different from any other social media, either.

Demographics:

What job people list on LinkedIn is one of the least useful metrics— founder is a job that anyone can get by creating it for themselves. And founders are hustling on LinkedIn to generate the sense that they have a real company. It's hustle culture and virtue signaling central, so there's a lot of bias built into that!

Beyond the relatively boring fact that lots of people are founders or cofounders or CEOs of small companies on LinkedIn, reading the things that I write, not everybody is an entrepreneur. Most work in healthcare, and the most populous states have the most readership of the things that I write:

Linked in demographics of my readership

This maps pretty closely on the information I'm getting from Substack:

And of course around the world…ish:

For the very few people who choose to pay for my writing, this is what the distribution looks like:

100% of my paying readership is United States based.

One of the things not reflected on LinkedIn demographics—but I see in the email addresses of my subscribers—is that I have readers from venture capital and investing. I also have a non-trivial number of readers who are senior leadership in large healthcare organizations, both profit and not-for-profit. The number of c-level executives is not zero.

Takeaways as I understand them, and I welcome the feedback from more knowledgeable readers:

If you write about deeply personal topics about what you're passionate, that's going do well on LinkedIn.

If you have content that will provoke a conversation, that will do well on LinkedIn.

Humor does less well than sincerity and controversy.

The relationship between visibility and Share-worthiness your posts cannot be overstated.

Some of my best performing posts (other than the ones featured above) have been about my enthusiasm for the work of others, and this is a really good thing to lean into. Despite the fact that LinkedIn is basically “self-promotion as a service,” and actually end up going better if you don't do that much.

The relationship between traction on LinkedIn and driving readership to a newsletter is limited.

Being a good writer is rewarded either way with growth in readership. But you shouldn't confuse newsletter content with LinkedIn content or vice versa.

Most people do not pay for a newsletter.

Monetizing any of this is hard early on.

Regular and consistent posting is rewarded.

The perfect is the enemy of the good.

Do not let AI write your posts or your articles. Write it yourself. Unless it's all SEO bait, in which case go for it.

POLL
Does Owen Have LinkedIn Game?
I have more engagement
0%
I have more followers
0%
No, cmon. No.
0%
Impressive
100%
Unbelievable
0%
POLL CLOSED

A final thank you to Ryan Sager at whosponsorsstuff a great resource for newsletter writers looking for advertising who made this tool to estimate ad pricing!

Thanks all for reading. And I’m accepting sponsors! Inquire within!

The Frontier Psychiatrists is built in public.

Subscribed

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
4 Likes
∙
3 Restacks
4
2
3
Share
Previous
Next
