Title: Professor Muir’s Application To Teach Organic Chemistry @ NYU
URL: https://thefrontierpsychiatrists.substack.com/p/professor-muirs-application-to-teach
Source element: <article>
---
Professor Muir’s Application To Teach Organic Chemistry @ NYU
Students at NYU got an organic chemistry processor fired. Can it be taught better? Yes.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
OCT 07, 2022
∙ PAID
4
2
Share

There’s a recent kerfuffle around NYU’s dismissal of a long standing teacher of organic chemistry, based on students complaining. They didn’t like failing grades, and this has made for good reading in the New York Times. It hasn’t made for a particularly good discussion in the public discourse about the utility of teaching organic chemistry well, or about the role of organic chemistry in science education. I think this is probably because nobody either writing or reading about it has any idea what organic chemistry even is. This article seeks to rectify that deficiency in the public imagination, so we can all have some sense of what it is we are being angry about one way or the other with a degree of specificity. Thank me later.

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

Organic chemistry is notoriously the hardest class in college that people have to take before they get to medical school. This is, I’m positing, both a shame and also not because it’s hard—it’s just taught in a way that fails make it relevant to almost anyone.

The general strategy is to teach about the profound absent examples that display its profundity in interesting ways.

I really enjoyed organic chemistry. This is the story of why:

A nifty molecule containing hydrogen and carbon. That’s it!

The word organic has a different meaning in the context of organic chemistry than in common usage. The common usage is … fuzzy. The word is used to denote wholesomeness, goodness, a presumed lack of pesticides, and that sort of thing. Nothing unnatural! Heavens, no. All natural! Imagine a mountain stream, pristine, running through what might as well be heaven…

In the context of chemistry, organic means carbon containing.

Diamonds and coal: both made entirely of carbon.

Carbon is the important element—when it comes to the possibility of living things existing. This is because carbon can connect to more other atoms than any other kind of atom. It’s the super-connector.

So, dear readers, let’s start at the first building blocks of understanding and build our way up to carbon. We will connect ideas from there so that you can understand what I understand: life is really cool.

Atoms are made up of three components, and I am not gonna get super wonky.1 True story: the pieces that make up reality are like Russian dolls, smaller and smaller as you keep looking deeper and deeper. But that’s subatomic physics—and we are not gonna go there—Higgs to the Boson, top quark, out, yo. 🎤 ⬇️.

3 protons, making the above atom the element Lithium.

Protons: Protons are in the nucleus of atoms and they have a positive charge. The number of protons determines what kind of element we’re dealing with.

Neutrons: Neutrons weigh just as much as protons, and are also in the nucleus, but have no charge. They’re basically dead weight, for our purposes today.

Electrons: They orbit the nucleus, have a weight that is only a tiny fraction of a proton or neutron, and their charges is negative, but equivalent to that in the opposite direction of a proton.

The atomic nucleus is held together by what we call the strong force, and this is basically nuclear glue that holds protons and neutrons together so they are a unified nucleus functionally.

Electrons are free-floating, but they organize themselves. This organization is into electron shells, each of which can have only a certain number of electrons. The innermost shell is two. Further out you can hold eight, the next layer out holds 10, etc.

There are two kinds of bonds, between different atoms. The first are called ionic bonds, and they are of limited importance for this explanation. If you’re on the far left of the periodic table, it’s really easy for you to lose an electron. If you’re on the far right of the periodic table, but not all the way to the absolute right, you can pick up an extra electron. This leads to full-on positive charge on one side and negative charge on the other side of two atoms, and these two atoms come together to form salts.

Presumably sodium chloride, better known as table salt. Ionic bonds all around.

Salts are just ionically bonded atoms. Sodium is on the far left, chloride is on the far right. When sodium gives up an electron to chloride, we have sodium chloride, table salt. Lithium is also on the far left, just above sodium on the periodic table. It connects the same way, dropping an electron and then bonding with chloride or bromine, etc.

If you’ve looked at a medication before, often you’ll see that it’s listed as “something-or-other-medication HCl”.

Wellbutrin: A Hydrochloride salt (HCl)
Bupropion on its own. Traditionally in these diagrams, each carbon has the C omitted, and each bond between carbons is drawn as a line. So, in the six sided ring, there are assumed to be six carbons, one at each of the corners.
Bupropion HCl—it’s just the same bupropion as above, rotated, and you can see there is a Cl—H hanging out on the left.

Or “this-or-that-medication HBr”.

Aplenzin: it’s what happens when you take bupropion, and you make it a hydrobromide salt—see the HBr? I literally do not see the point of this product, but somebody got a patent on it.

And now, the chemical structure of the Aplenzin (the hydrobromide salt):

Bupropion HBr—same bupropion, this time the salt is formed with Br—H on the right.

Salts: the way to make organic compounds into pills easily. Also, apparently different salts are also a way to create the same meds with wildly different prices:

The hydrobromide salt of bupropion has a 522 mg dosage because bromine weighs more than chloride. The Hydro-chloride salt version, better known as Wellbutrin, is 450 mg for the same amount of drug.

Boom—“different” drugs.

Wellbutrin, 1 Month: $8.70.

Aplenzin, 1 Month: $2,446.00.

If you are thinking, Wait, these are essentially the same thing, drug wise, just slightly different salts to make them pills? I can see the same chemical structures above?! …you would be more or less correct. And this is why knowing a little something about chemistry is the power to not be scammed.

You’re getting so excited already, I can tell!

Behold the repetitive majesty.

Back to the periodic table, and we’re gonna work our way over to the important elements we need to deal with right now. The good thing is that we only need to deal with very few of them in order to deal with all of life. Everything lower down ends up being interesting, but not particularly important.

Periodic table, top left.

Hydrogen is top left, and it has one proton, one electron, room for two electrons in the outer electron shell, and so it can make one bond. That one bond is sharing an electron (it’s actually—to be super science-specific—two electrons being shared, one from each atom). This is, by the way, where things get exciting. Ionic bonds, the ones that make salts, are where one atom gives up an electron entirely to another atom. They’re held together by the electrostatic force that we’re familiar with from our hair standing on end when we run our feet over the carpet.

But atoms can also share electrons. Sharing an electron pair between two atoms is called a covalent bond.

Carbon in the middle, with four bonded atoms depicted.

And it’s basically a little bit of a game of infinite juggling. One atom throws the electron, the other atom catches it and throws it right back. Repeat forever. This keeps two atoms, or more atoms if they can make more bonds, covalently bonded to each other. Breaking covalent bonds is kind of a big deal. Mostly they like to stick together.

Periodic table, top right.

OK, right side of the periodic table, top row, let’s do this! On the far right side, up top, we have helium. Helium has two protons, and two electrons. Remember that first electron shell? It taps out at two. Helium has two. That means no sharing of electrons. That means no bonds. The entire right side of the periodic table is essentially dead to the world. We call these noble gases, because they don’t interact with stuff. Apparently it’s noble to be a loner? They don’t “interact with stuff” because they have full outer electron shells. That means no covalent bonds. And that means they are what we call inert. Chemical interactions are all about electrons going into, or out of, bonding relationships, and the far right side of the periodic table, these are avowed bachelors. They have everything they need.

It’s our friend the top left of the periodic table again.

Lithium, Beryllium, on the left side, first row down. These are gonna be ionic bonding candidates, and it’s not till we make that jump over to the right side that we hit Boron. Boron is boring…

Honestly, Boron?

Carbon! Carbon is the sixth element on the periodic table. That means it has six protons. It usually has six neutrons. So, the atomic number is six, and the weight is 12. Since the charge in the nucleus is six, its gonna have six electrons. It’s got to balance out.

Majestic, isn’t it?

You’ll remember, the innermost electron shell, for the first two electrons, gets filled up immediately. That next electron shell out, it has room for 8. And in majestic carbon, the first two go in that first shell, and basically are dead to the world. The outer electron shell is half full. Four slots out of the eight slots are taken. Note: Electrons like to pair. Electron shells like to fill.

And sometimes atoms are smarter than people, because they inherently realize sharing is a good idea. The amount of sharing that will happen for any given atom has to do with that outer electron shell and how many spare slots it has.

Some of the many ways you can connect carbon and hydrogen. Hydrocarbons. Not complicated.

Eight slots, four electrons, that means it’s got room for… four shares. Those four shares means it can make four separate covalent bonds. Co = together, valent = specified number (of electrons). Now you’ll notice, right next to this is nitrogen, it’s got three spare slots. It can make three bonds. Next is oxygen, which has one more electron, and the outer electron shell only has two spare slots, so it can make two covalent bonds. Everything on the second to last column, on the right, Florine, Chlorine, Bromine, has one spare slot, for one bond. Not complicated.

The superstars of life: the first row in the top right of the periodic table. They’re like the boy band elements. Carbon is really great at harmonies, sometimes oxygen can get a bit negative, nitrogen is fun to be around, and fluorine has an attitude you just can’t forget. They all have their own personalities!

Of Atomic Bondage

And here is the pretty wild part—for organic chemistry, and thus life, once we’ve made our way through this first row of the periodic table, we are 99% done. You don’t need to know almost anything else. All of organic chemistry falls out from what you just learned. How many bonds does nature make?

One, two, three, four. That’s it. That is the whole of organic chemistry. It’s a collection of one bond, two bonds, three bonds, four. That’s the whole show.

How much complexity can you make out of the range of 1 to 4 sharing bonds? All of life. Baller.

How is that for an Intro to Organic Chemistry? That is, for the record, what students were complaining about.

Your Simplified Professor,

—O. Scott Muir, M.D.

The Frontier Psychiatrists is a reader-supported publication. To receive free opinion content and some paid content too, subscribe below!

Subscribed

1

For once. Am I right?

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
4
2
Share
Previous
Next
