*Should* MDMA-AT Be Saved? Part III
"Harms and misconduct will scale if they are allowed to train and certify therapists."
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
JUN 07, 2024
∙ PAID
16
8
3
Share

Welcome to The Frontier Psychiatrists. In part I, we covered what PTSD is and how Lykos Therapeutics, formerly MAPS PBS, submitted a novel combination of MDMA and “Assisted Therapy” with their branded (and also brand-new) therapy manual intended for that therapy to the FDA for the treatment of PTSD.

In Part II, I addressed the absurdity of the proposal on the part of MAPS PBC’s now deposed-ish founder, Rick Doblin, Ph.D, that all MDMA therapists take the drugs as part of their “training.”

Share

Today is part III in out series on MDMA-AT, it’s FDA process, post-traumatic stress disorder, and the unsettling details coming to light about what allegedly happened in the clinical trials for a FDA-breakthrough pathway novel therapeutic.

Subscribed
What Did The FDA Advisory Committee Hear?

Many of those sharing their stories with the FDA highlighted the least recognized domain of PTSD symptoms—a pervasive change in thinking about the world and one’s self toward the negative. Mistrust, fear, dread, and anger become the compass points of one's experience after another exposure to trauma. In the DSM-5-TR, these are in “Cluster C” when it comes to PTSD—which, by the way, the MAPS MDMA-AT therapy manual only does a scant job of describing and, frankly, is off from how the DSM-5-TR handles the disorder in an avoidable confusing way:

1.1 MDMA for PTSD

PTSD is a serious public health problem that causes significant suffering and contributes substantially to healthcare costs. A complex biopsychosocial condition, PTSD is characterized by a combination of three types of symptoms:

1. Hyper-arousal symptoms, such as hypervigilance, anxiety, and sleep disturbance.

2. Intrusive re-experiencing of traumatic experiences, such as intrusive memories, nightmares, or flashbacks.
3. Avoidance symptoms, including emotional numbing and withdrawal.

For my readers who read yesterday, you will note that the criteria for PTSD are quite a bit more extensive than what is above. There are four domains of symptoms:

A: Intrusive memories

B: Avoidance

C: Negative changes in thinking and mood

D: Changes in physical and emotional reactions

What the MAPS manual lists as “avoidance?” These are classified as “negative changes in thinking and mood.” I think it's a little strange that the manual for therapy to treat PTSD doesn't include the official DSM-5-TR diagnostic criteria for PTSD and miscategorizes others.

I will take a moment to say a little bit more about PTSD, as I experienced it as someone who happens to be a psychiatrist— with the disorder. These symptoms—particularly the cluster “C” symptoms that describe anhedonia, pervasive sense of horror, guilt, fear, and absence of positive emotions- are not time-limited like an exaggerated startle response happens when something startles you. These symptoms change how you interact with the world. It also impacts how the world interacts with you. I noticed that I am less pleasant, more on guard, and less joyful, which is different from how I was before. As to what my traumatic experiences are? That is an obvious question. I will leave that for another time—but suffice it to say that 25% of Psychiatrists are the victims of stalking. The vast majority of individuals with PTSD are women who have experienced sexual abuse, in the US at least, though it could strike anyone.

Tie dye hats on the MAPS site.

What were the hopeful experiences of the individuals who spoke at the FDA AdComm? Here are some hopeful quotes from public participants.

One veteran, Jonathan Lubecki, shared:

“I'm here today because unlike the 76, 538 veterans who have taken their lives since I underwent my first session of MDMA therapy in 2014, I participated in a Lykos Therapeutics Clinical Trial and for the past decade, I have been allowed to live, to truly live.”

Another trial participant, Sarah Sayani, added:

I can wholeheartedly say that I am a different, better, stronger and more courageous version of myself due to this groundbreaking therapy. When I signed up for this trial, I had accepted my PTSD diagnosis as something I would live with forever. It affected every aspect of my life, but I had learned to manage my symptoms, such as severe anxiety…I got my power back. People used to always tell me I would need it.

These testimonials are powerful. They were describing experiences that I very much want for myself. Given the explosion of PTSD in young people, as documented in the New York Times this week, I can't imagine anybody wouldn't want more effective treatments for PTSD. At the same time, individuals with trauma are vulnerable. The promise of miracle cures is seductive.

One of the advisory committee's major concerns was that the study sponsor had not documented positive subjective experiences during MDMA-AT sessions in its submission. Not knowing how high a drug makes you makes it difficult to assess the risk of abuse. The sponsor's decision not to record these outcomes was a judgment call and went against the FDA’s prior recommendations. It may be one of the many purposeful decisions that may doom the submission, as it stands.

By creating a new psychotherapy, which the FDA is not used to regulating because it's not under its purview, and then submitting that to the FDA? Lykos made a terrible—or completely understandable—decision (under a different set of more sinister assumptions). That comment? Foreshadowing! Now, instead of just examining the risks and benefits of a drug, something with which the FDA is intimately familiar, every risk of this combination treatment is part of the conversation:

“I have real concerns with the validity of the data and the allegations of misconduct,” she added, “especially as a patient representative.” “I can’t in good conscience support something where these many harms are being reported,” [the patient advocate on the panel] continued.

The most horrifying moment for me, was as follows:

A statement was read on behalf of Meaghan Buisson, which detailed non-consensual touch and sexual assault during Lykos’ Phase 2 program. Buisson feels that their experience was not adequately reflected in the study publication, nor was it appropriately responded to by the organization. “The sponsor lied to the committee about adverse events and safety monitoring,” the statement further alleges, before “urging the panel to reconsider the veracity of Lykos’ claims.”

It’s also not every day one hears that a former leader of a clinical trial’s study sponsor accused, in a public governmental forum, might be in violation of the Nuremberg Code:

Sasha Sisko raised various concerns about Rick Doblin’s conduct, going so far as to accuse him of violating the Nuremberg Code with regard to his apparent interest in bringing MDMA-assisted therapy to conflict zones.

Yes, the Nuremberg Code. It was created to regulate ethical research behavior after the horrific experiments of Nazi Schutzstaffel Officer Dr. Josef Mengle at Auschwitz. When Auschwitz-related concerns are raised during an FDA hearing?

Things have gone fantastically wrong.

There is a real problem. Even if the above isn’t substantiated—it's still a problem that anyone would feel so strongly that they would even make the comparison. The criticism from many of the public comments was remarkably brutal, as in this moment from public comment 20:

Lykos has exploited this lack of monitoring and sanction from the FDA. In fact, they're betting on it. …At South by Southwest this year, Lykos CEO Amy Emerson shared that patients presenting with increased suicidal ideation are “actually part of the process” of psychedelic therapy.

The idea that worsening suicidal thoughts is part of the process is troubling, but all the more so because the study sponsor reported no suicidal ideation or behavior to the FDA in the MDMA-AT group. This is a point of contention that was shared in a petition to the FDA calling for an advisory meeting:

The petition included an account from an anonymous former MAPS PBC employee where a participant made “a serious suicide attempt during a dosing session” that was not reported. Two former MAPS employees who spoke to Business Insider said they had heard about a participant attempting to run out into traffic during a session. They both confirmed this incident was not reported.

The normalization of an increase in suicidal ideation is orthodoxy for MAPS, given its therapy manual is based on the “teachings” of Dr. Stanislav Grof, an advocate of transpersonal therapies. They are not…how do I put this… mainstream psychotherapy:

Various neuroses are mapped to traumas at particular stages, e.g. ennui could be caused by Caesarian section, resulting in an individual feeling like they have little reason to exert effort. Suicidal ideation is explained by the deep memory of prenatal suffering being terminated by release from the womb (transposed to an escape from life itself). Chemical addiction could stem from the use of anesthesia during birth. Religious belief (e.g. identification with the crucifixion of Jesus) is also linked to birth, with reincarnation explaining transpersonal experiences.

We will return to Dr. Grof later in the article— his influence is pervasive and F*cking Crazy. The public comment continues with deeply disturbing claims that the FDA will now be forced to investigate:

In the same breath, she acknowledged that committing instances like these to medical records would be poorly received by gatekeepers of public health.

Omission of adverse events is one of the specific allegations leveled against the applicant. As I mentioned in my written comment, an organization convinced it's on a mission to save the world might find justification of any means to do so. …Patients living with PTSD need rigorously tested care, not the faith healing of a therapy cult's latest rebrand of laying on of hands.

The experiences of the individuals who had recovered in the studies are heartening, and I hope for that kind of recovery for myself and many others. We all want to be well. It's seductive to have wellness dangled in front of you. It's also the responsibility of those with a tremendously potent intervention to mind the risks of the bias inherent in that kind of treatment. And that's not what happened here, according to the FDA advisory committee.

What is This Pseudoscience Doing Here?

Dr. Stanislov Grof is a founder of the approach championed in the manual for the therapy submitted to the FDA. If you thought some of the items mentioned in my article yesterday seemed bizarrely pseudoscience and squicky, you were correct:

Whatever “natural product” they are selling, I’m not buying it.

That nonsense may make sense on a bottle of mystical, quirky soap, but not so much in an NDA to a federal regulator. It gets more unsettling, and much of it is a dog whistle for gay panic. I wish I were kidding. Dr. Grof is the author of “LSD Psychotherapy,” which is available for purchase on the MAPS website, along with assorted tie-dye shirts, bucket hats and fanny packs. Grof is prominently referenced in the first lines of the MDMA-AT treatment manual’s section 1.2 Treatment Approach:

The foundation for this therapeutic approach was laid by Stan and Christina Grof, Leo Zeff, George Greer, Requa Tolbert, Ralph Metzner, and many others…

One of the standard prohibitions of psychotherapy is getting handsy with your patients. This is just NOT DONE. It’s not done for very good reasons—physical touch is potent and can lead to boundary violations, abuse, and all the more so in the context of the treatment of deeply unwell individuals who have overwhelmingly been physically or sexually abused in their past:

The 2002 Ethics Code of the American Psychological Association says very little about touch and does not even use the word ”touch” anywhere in the code. Sexual touching is, of course, prohibited and is always unethical (sections 10.05 – 10.08). Psychologists are also prohibited from engaging in behavior that might constitute sexual harassment (3.02), conflicts of interest (3.06), or exploitation of clients (3.08).

By avoiding anchoring in mainstream psychotherapeutic thought—that has held physical touch as verboten more or less since Freud, MAPS leans on Dr. Grof. He, in turn, goes off into the deep end in his writing about, and I honestly can’t believe I am writing this, especially during pride, but:

"the third most common source of panic is the fear of becoming homosexual. It is usually initiated by feelings of very authentic identification with representatives of the opposite sex. A male subject can experience not only an authentic female body image but also a very genuine sense of what it feels like to be pregnant, to deliver a child, or to have a vagina and clitoral organ. The less frequent experience and the female does not usually involve a sense of having a masculine body, but male psychological characteristics. It is necessary to reassure subjects that this is a unique opportunity to gain access to the experiential world of the opposite sex. It will ultimately strengthen the sense of one's own sexual identity rather than cause a homosexual transformation. Another source of homosexual fears can be sudden feelings of physical attraction to a sitter of the same sex. This can usually be deciphered as a transference of early central feelings towards the parent of the same sex. The deepest source of homosexual panic in a male subject seems to be the emergence of frightening birth memories.”

And, of course, Dr. Grof’s wisdom in the following:

“the vagina appears to be a murderous organ, the individual cannot imagine approaching it again as a source of pleasure…”

Grof, the foremost inspiration for the MDMA-AT therapy submitted for approval, continues:

It was repeatedly observed that patients with serious latent or manifest problems concerning homosexuality had a greater disposition towards panic reactions, paranoid perception, the use of projection in regard to their LSD experiences, and delusional interpretation of the situation and the session in general. These difficulties usually occurred or were partially accentuated when a preoccupation with their homosexual problems was the central focus of their experience.

I get that this is the stuff of its era—homosexuality was in the DSM for far too long—but it’s not the kind of thinking that should be re-injected into modern medicine. Another speaker summed up the problems with MAPS PBC in the FDA Public Comments thusly:

Dr. Doblin, his long-term desire is a quote, spiritualized humanity, politically advancing this mission using the reputation of science…

And like the worst of religions, including my own, what happens when people are abused in the name of a religious mission? As we saw in these trials, they are often discarded, silenced, minimized for political gain, and tossed away as inconvenient. And so while I support anyone who gets healing from MDMA therapy….[I have] concerns about the intermingling of a utopian spiritual movement with science.

I must also say there is a certain irony and questions earlier about risk assessment and whether participants increase illicit use of MDMA. Both the FDA and the public should be aware that this study is run primarily by people with an extensive use of MDMA in illicit settings. …people…were harmed under their care with a falsely spiritual inhumanity…

Speaking of spirituality, a common saying amongst FDA regulators is: “In God we trust, all others must bring data.”

The Frontier Psychiatrists is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Subscribed

Share

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
16 Likes
∙
3 Restacks
16
8
3
Share
Previous
Next
