SXSW Dispatch: Disrupting Lawns!
Lessons from my trip to Austin
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
MAR 08, 2023
∙ PAID
1
Share

Grass1. It’s a vital part of the ecosystem of the prairie. Lawns, conversely, are a pox on the house of arid regions in a climate-changing world.

I’m here in Austin, Texas, for my winning conflict of interest disclosure (my darling wife is speaking at SXSW).2

I’m not speaking at SXSW. I am the trailing spouse, the David-Foster-Wallace-Wannabe. A am but a “journalist” reporting on the Hysterically Real.

Solving the “lawn problem” requires a disruptive approach to grass. We need to reimagine lawns! The issues are deeply rooted in our language and lives—the grass is greener! We don’t need to understand the problem better, and I’ll prove it:

“Lawns are Broken.” This sentiment is as dull as it is non-directive3.

Rather, we need to iterate with solutions that disrupt the idea of lawn. Lawns are not just grass. They are liminal spaces. AI can generate both answers to questions AND answers to the opposite of questions. We, too, need to draw from latent spaces in the far reaches of Machine Learning data sets otherwise unimagined; we need to apply this philosophy to lawns. Or, walk around Austin with our mom and notice stuff.

“Lawns:: -1”

I am on a walk with my the widow Muir4 in Austin, Texas, disrupting lawns 2.0. We see an adequate model for the role of design thinking in addressing barriers to scale. This is beyond fixing broken lawns. I took some pictures.

Figure 1:

Left: No f-s.

Right: Astroturf.

And, I will note, it is literally and figuratively greener. Both of these approaches, crucially, address the lawn problem by accepting the matrix that is lawns, not asking what lies beyond them.

There are other concepts that can become solutions, as we can see here:

What if the liminal space between the sidewalk and street was a rock garden instead of grass? I have answered that question above.

What about the ability of grass to absorb heat on a hot summer day the urban planners ask? We may need a combined approach, as pictured above, in which we reimagine a world in which one liminal space, between sidewalk and street, becomes easy to maintain. Cause it is rocks. Then we mirror that rock garden as it transitions from sidewalk to wild and unkempt greenery on the other side.

Because now, we will stick wildlands in a liminal space between the sidewalk and the venue! “Lawns are broken:: -1”

We can do this. Reporting from Austin, Texas,

—Owen Scott Muir, M.D.

Scale this post.

Share

1

This article is satire. I wrote it about grass, not healthcare because I don’t want to insult anyone. But the intent is satirical in nature while maintaining appropriate distance from companies and humans who might otherwise feel bad. Out of love and respect, I am going with lawncare not healthcare to make my points and expect readers to FIND and REPLACE with their minds.

2

In deference to style guides I imagine will please corporate PR, I’m not mentioning her name or company. Welcome to The Real Venture Health Houseparents of Brooklyn.

3

Can I make a VC pitch deck problem slide statement or what?

4

A reductionist summary of the state of affairs

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
1 Like
1
Share
Previous
Next
