SXSW Dispatch: Dear Panels on Psychedelics and Health Tech; An Insincere Apology
I didn't really have a question.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
MAR 13, 2023
∙ PAID
2
Share

I know you said you had time for questions at the end. I know I got up to ask a question. I know I did this more than once.

I have something to admit. I didn't really have a question. I ended the thing I said with a “?”

This was disingenuous. I'm a total Narc, I get that.

Honestly, I'm frustrated. I am frustrated by the confusion with which we treat health care and the innovation that surrounds it.

For example: There is no convincing “payers.” There is making arguments to individuals working at large healthcare payment systems that are compelling. To those individual people. Those individual humans can become willing to advocate for the changes you want to see internally. help the person you're talking to make the case for themselves, not for you!

I like disruptive innovation in bad health outcomes. Psychedelic medicine would be disruptive! There is an equation for how this happens:

Medicine = science + payment + regulation*

Regulation is essentially ethical practice plus legal guidelines

This is not an original idea, but I did hear it mentioned in a panel at SXSW!

Otherwise, much like Oregon— scams and criminals. I'm not actually “hating” on criminal enterprise in the form of drug dealers—there are a lot of cultural determining factors that make that sort of work makes sense. I hate the game, not the player. I do hate scams though.

Understand the incentives. Doing innovation right makes for a better game and less disruptive players. Bad disruptive, not venture pitch deck disruptive. We need to be the regulation and advocacy we want see in the world, not just the change. Speaking of which, feel free to comment on the proposed update to the DEA Telehealth prescribing on regulations.gov.

I'm going to summarize the key points behind any question I asked with a deplorable lack of sincerity:

Traditional "health insurance companies" do not have the financial incentive to save money.1

"Health insurance companies" don't want to save money, that's not the incentive.2

Health insurance companies aren't really health insurance companies, from a balance sheet perspective.

Although it sounds counterintuitive, understanding the incentives helps you understand why systems don't really work the way you think they should.

“First principles” don’t work in healthcare without an understanding of regulations—

E.g. there is no first principle that fax machines are great. There is just the regulation that they're allowable!

Regulations need to be enforced.

Regulations need to be understood.

It's not mental health that is so important, it's less suffering. It's as little suffering as we can get to.

We should act in the interest of our fellow humans.

If we don't make the most profits, people will take our good intentions away from us in ways that make more money.

Thus, the most ethical business in Healthcare will also be the most profitable.

People and profits. Profits don't care about people. Profits protect great care from profiteers.

Big healthcare companies are so unbelievably complicated that I don't believe anyone understands them. This includes people running them. At the end of the day, people wanna get along, can I get fired, do their job, help a couple people, all the regular stuff. Without a strong sense of what happens when you do that good job, it's really hard to make ethical choices about how to spend your time.

Thank you for taking my question, and I apologize for grandstanding, but not that much. Because this is important for every minute I understand, and I wasn't on your panel. I'm happy to join the panel next time! I will also be on guard for rabble-rousers like myself in the audience.

Much like a Ted talk, this column is an idea worth spreading.

Share

1

Most of their revenue and profit comes from their pharmacy benefit manager business, which they all have. But driving down costs is not the actual goal, its profits getting bigger.

2

FTC investigation into PBMs

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
2 Likes
2
Share
Previous
Next
