SXSW Dispatch: Disappointing Smoked Salmon Toast Consumed
The expectations we set for the future frame our experience
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
MAR 12, 2023
∙ PAID
3
Share

Evergreen content is one of the hallmarks of successful journalism. I'm not a successful journalist. Fresh takes and bold predictions about the future can go viral, but it's those articles about things that will always be true that really pay off over time.

Precious little journalism is dedicated to disappointment. Neither breaking news nor Evergreen? Yet, it is moments like these that define our days.

I wanted to get breakfast this morning. I got out of bed, and did it. Austin, Texas is not a hopping town at 9 AM on a Sunday morning in the middle of SXSW. I will need to accept the reason 9 AM on the street is so dead is that everybody else was having a better time than me last night. And, as a somewhat overweight man with arthritis over the age of 40, this is destined to be true ever onward.

Morning has been ceded to people like myself. People who get up early. Many of us are parents. Many of us go to bed on time. Some of us attempt to go to bed on time, and still deal with insomnia. At SXSW, I'm probably mandated to mention psychedelics? Ok, I checked, and I also need to quickly pivot to digital therapeutics.

I bet people were experiencing the excitement of psychedelic compounds prior to the atlas drudgery of the regulatory complexity and reimbursement models necessary to try and isn't actual medicine last night, but it's probably worth mentioning we have digital Therapeutics for insomnia. I'm looking at you, Somyrst.

For early risers like myself, particularly at a conference like SXSW, where lines in which we wait are the stable-coin of the realm, breakfast you can get right now is the emotional arbitrage opportunity that we've been dreaming of. Nothing is going to de-peg my desire for a good breakfast.

So I found an option this morning. Like many restaurants in Austin, the memo on cappuccino being a the new Black coffee had not been received. Get with the times.

I ordered salmon toast. Given the headline of this article, you're expecting an elaborate description of why this toast wasn't any good, but you're not going get that. It was so disappointing that I decided to write entire article based on the premise that the toast was disappointing. But, as I concluded this article, I realized that the most powerful way to make you suffer like I have suffered? Maybe it is to disrupt your ideas about the very nature of complaining. It wasn't good. That's all you're getting. And it's that kind of lack of satisfaction that I experienced with my breakfast, and now you are experiencing with this deeply unsatisfying article.

I took the liberty of asking artificial intelligence to generate the above image using the prompt: disappointing salmon toast. Generative AI, much like SXSW, and all of human experience, can really deliver remarkable things, when we ask the right questions and set the right expectations.

—Owen Scott Muir, M.D.

Share

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
3 Likes
3
Share
Previous
Next
