The Best Mental Health Startups That Don't Exist Yet?
Free ideas for founders In waiting.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
FEB 22, 2023
∙ PAID
10
Share

Good morning everybody! Who's ready to found a company, and try to raise money in an extremely tight market? Well, at least when it comes to the following businesses that don't exist but should, it's not me. On that off chance, dear readers, that it is you…

There are care companies that don't exist but definitely, definitely, definitely should. Market validation is an important thing to start with, and it's always easier to start a company when there's already a company that looks pretty much like that thing because then nobody has to do a lot of thinking.

NOCD is an awesome company.1 It exists, and just raised $33M in their Series B. NOCD is a Telehealth company that provides on-model Exposure and Response Prevention Psychotherapy for the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Unlike most of the other "let's make CBT app companies” — they didn't try to make CBT an app.

They took psychotherapy which requires training and supervision to do well. They found the condition for which it is extremely helpful, but not broadly accessible. And, in a stroke of genius, they trained therapists to do it well and then provided that therapy to patients who needed it. With…humans! And supervision! No robots were harmed in the making of this training or business model!

And then they got their patients to advocate for contracting with payers.

Brilliant. Healthcare done well— in a systematic fashion—as a company. It's not an endless technology-matching platform marketplace, it's great care with relentless product market fit based on decades of evidence.

I am so into this company.

However, the success of this company makes a bunch of other companies completely obvious to me, but I don't have the time to build all of them, so you can if you want. Somebody should, and I'll go condition by condition.

Borderline Personality Disorder

There are at least 3 clinical models that could be used to build a great BPD treatment enterprise.

Dialectical Behavioral Therapy — everybody knows about DBT thanks to the New York Times’s complete and utter love affair with this very difficult-to-scale modality. Behavioral Tech owns the training for DBT, so this is perhaps more expensive to scale than something else, but it's a strong brand.

Mentalization-Based Treatment (MBT) this approach out of the United Kingdom has excellent outcomes for borderline personality disorder and is a model in which people can be readily trained. I say this as someone who has written a manual on the topic.

Good Psychiatric Management (GPM): this approach, created by John Gunderson at McLean was built to be broadly disseminated.

Any of those three approaches or even all three of them could be implemented by a company trying to build a treatment solution, there is already a significant amount of advocacy from patients and families that would jump all over the opportunity to have this be more accessible.

Bipolar Disorder

Interpersonal Social Rhythms Therapy exists. It can be trained up and implemented just like exposure and response prevention, and I know this because the person who did the training I received for IPSRT also did the training for ERP. One postdoc could build both training models, and did, years ago, in the hospital in which I worked—Thanks Talia!

Unlike NOCD, this model would probably also want to include prescribing. But here we have a big win also, because the actual answer is lithium, as I wrote about last week. Lithium is a drug that needs a system. There aren't that many other medications to master, and doing the evidence-based thing is probably going to do a great job compared to the standard of care—which is not doing any of those things. Someone should've done this years ago. As a bonus, almost none of the medications necessary are controlled substances. Honestly, why Cerebral didn't pivot hard to this after ADHD blew up is beyond me, but whatever, somebody should do it.

Subscribed
Schizophrenia

Mindstrong blew up $160 million in funding trying to come up with fancy AI-guided models of to reimagine care for schizophrenia better, but they already exist:

Prescribe clozapine. This is a drug that requires extensive monitoring and expertise, but it's traditionally managed by nurse practitioners in clozapine clinics. This is a tech company without the tech or valuations.

Long-acting injectable antipsychotics: these medicines also work, and are better than the standard of care. It’s already what Germany does.

Early Treatment Programs: these programs have been wildly successful in the management of patients with psychotic illnesses.

Tech-enabled solutions: the ICRC study, done by John Kane and colleagues at the Zucker-Hillside reduced hospitalization by a lot. The study title is “improving care and reducing costs.” And it did. By giving patients with psychotic illness access to technology and navigators to help them use it. Oh, like a TECH PLAY?

There is an already published study on using technology to create a scaleable version of early treatment programs. John Kane has moved to industry, but he's built several companies like MedAvante, now HealthRhythms, etc. There is even a government payer, in Medicaid and Medicare for the disabled, and probably an exit to united healthcare exists, just to drive down the cost of their dual eligibles with Medicare/Medicaid. TripleAimPartners is basically asking you to fund this before this sentence is over.

This would be good for patients and good for the world. There are zero reasons this isn't a huge company. It's 1% of the population. Come on people. 3.3 million people in the US. Let me market size that for you: $281.6 billion in 2020.

Yes, I know about Firsthand. Yes, I think that is a great company. But my understanding, is they're not actually doing all the care, and what I'm saying is a company should exist to do it all. So they can make sure it actually works.

We need more companies that deploy great evidence-based care at scale. NOCD paved the way for this as a believable business model. I hope some people run with it.

Those who are about to Found (a health tech startup), We Salute You!

—Owen Scott Muir, M.D.

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

1

Full disclosure: I have nothing to disclose. I have no financial stake in NOCD. I have no business relationship with the company. I’m just a fanboy. I did extensive diligence on the model, and it is good care. Not to invest, just to refer patients who need it. Thanks, founder with lived experience!

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
10 Likes
10
Share
Previous
Next
