THE WIZARD OF ODDS
The Visit to the Dermatologist
Chapter 2, The Scam Behind The Curtain
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
FEB 26, 2023
∙ PAID
5
4
Share

However, on the day of her appointment, despite having filled out all of her information in the patient portal, it turned out that Dr. Skinman’s practice was not accepting UnitedHealthShare. Dorothy tried to calm herself down upon hearing this news. After checking to ensure that Toto was a certified service animal and thus able to join her in the appointment, she decided to pay cash for a visit with the dermatologist.

“Hi Dorothy, it's good to meet you,” said the doctor.

“I just wanna know what these terrible spots are!”

The dermatologist got out a magnifying glass with a special light, and looked at one spot on her body, then another, and then another. There were dozens of them.

“So you said you had a case of strep just a couple of weeks back?” asked the doctor.

“I get strep throat from time to time, but I take antibiotics.”

“Well, Dorothy, it seems you may have a condition we call psoriasis1.”

“Ruff!” barked Toto.

“Rough indeed!” agreed the dermatologist.

“My parents died when I was young, but I heard my father had psoriasis too.”

“Psoriasis is an autoimmune condition–it can run in families. In some people, it can be kicked off after a streptococcal infection– your immune system confuses your own body for the infection ever onward!”

“Well, I want to do everything I can to treat my condition!” Dorothy replied.

“There are a few more diagnostic steps we'll need to take. For example, some people don't just have psoriasis; they have a systemic problem in their whole body, joints, tendons, and skin. It is called psoriatic arthritis2. We want to make sure you don't have that.”

“Ruff! Ruff!” Barked Toto.

“We have a range of options, including ultraviolet light therapy3 for the rash on your skin.”

“Does that mean I'll be tan?” Asked Dorothy.

“You might be the first well-tanned person in Kansas!” replied the doctor.

“What else do we need to do?” asked Dorothy hesitantly.

“Well, this part is the rub, but we're gonna need to draw some labs, and I'll have to refer you back to your primary care physician.”

“Why do I have to see her? You're the expert!” exclaimed Dorothy.

“We want to get you out of the woods, but I'm a specialist. And you need a referral from your primary care doctor to see a specialist.”

“But you're a doctor? Why can't you refer me to the other doctor? Or to the tests?”

“Because your health insurance makes every specialist referral go through your primary care doctor.”

“Well, that doesn't seem right at all!”

“It's an effort to control costs… I think?”

“Why, what does all of this cost?”

“Well, the medicine you might need, it’s a biologic4 with an orphan drug5 classification. It’s hundreds of thousands of dollars. Just for that one medicine. You might need more.”

“Ruff grrr ruff!” growled Toto.

“I agree with Toto,” said the doctor. “Before you can get that medication, it needs prior authorization6. The best medication is only indicated for psoriatic arthritis with obsessionality. Right now, we only know you have psoriasis. We need to confirm the accurate diagnosis first, and a rheumatologist is required in order to make that diagnosis. Your insurance company won't cover the medication if any other specialist, even a dermatologist like me, tries to prescribe it. The medicine itself needs to be prescribed through a specialty pharmacy7.

In your case, the specialty pharmacy is owned by your insurance company. The drug has to be approved by the Pharmacy Benefit Manager8, or PBM. The pharmacy benefit manager sounds like a person, but it's not. It's a company. And that company is also owned by your insurance company.

So before we can order any of the tests, see any other doctors, take any of the medications, or even order them, your insurance will make you jump through a bunch of hoops. They tell me it's all to control costs,” Dr. Skinman explained with compassion and a bit of frustration in his tone.

“But… But…” stammered Dorothy.

“Welcome to your Patient Journey. By the way, it looks like the visit with me was covered9, but when I used my illuminated magnifying glass, that was a separate procedure. So after this visit, expect a superbill and an Explanation of Benefits. It will list our conversation as part of the bill, which was an evaluation and management service. But the examination, using that little magnifying glass, that's a separate procedure, and it's not covered under your policy,” explained the doctor, with a sad look in his eye.

“This doesn't sound like a very good journey at all!” replied Dorothy, on the edge of tears.

“It's a pretty standard Patient Journey. And you're right; it's not very good. I’ve noticed you’ve been obsessing. It's possible to develop obsessive-compulsive disorder along with psoriasis or even psoriatic arthritis. I'm going to refer you to the Specialist. He is the only Board-certified rheumatologist who is also a Board-certified Psychiatrist. He’s a Wizard. He practices in Crimson City, a suburb of Boston. You're going to need to follow the Patient Journey roadmap. I have a handout. You can take a copy home. I'm hoping you are a candidate for a new drug called Schmaltz. It's the only approved treatment for psoriatic obsessionality.

The drug is injectable. They have a patent on the auto-injector technology, which makes it pretty easy to give a shot to yourself at home. It is an interleukin10 inhibitor11 and jak-stat modulator for psoriasis with OCD12. They were able to get an orphan drug indication from the FDA. So it should be able to help you with whatever problems you have, but unfortunately, it's quite a Patient Journey to get it approved.

This handout illustrates the whole process. You see, there's this yellow dotted line. That's the Patient Journey. Just follow the yellow dotted line. However, it's a long way from Kansas to Boston. There aren't any good direct flights. So for a lot of the journey, you'll have to walk. The good news is that walking is an effective treatment for depression. Walking is pretty healthy overall, and the sunlight on the way is just as good as our ultraviolet therapy.”

“But… But… I may have to think about it. It seems like a lot of work, and these spots don't itch that badly,” said Dorothy.

“Dorothy, I want you to think about this. When patients like yourself have psoriasis or even psoriatic obsessionality, they can be at risk for heart attack or death by suicide. We're not going to know until after the blood work. A definitive diagnosis might also require an MRI. ”

“Is this why I've been feeling so low and worrying so much?”

“Well, it's possible. There are cases of OCD that have occurred after streptococcal infection.”

“Oh my!” exclaimed Dorothy.

“Follow the yellow dotted line on the Patient Journey handout. It will walk you through all the steps necessary to obtain prior authorization, and I'm sure you'll be OK. I'm making a referral to the Specialist. He's a classmate from medical school.”

With that, Dorothy picked up Toto and left Dr. Skinman’s office. She had a lot to think about. The Kansas sky looked ominous. A storm might be coming in. Every step felt like it hurt a little bit. Right there at the bottom of her feet. Was there something wrong with them too?

Dorothy had a lot to worry about. But trying to follow some complicated Patient Journey, well, that wasn't for today. So maybe everything will be fine on its own?

1

This condition is called guttate psoriasis, a complication of streptococcal infection with GAS. Psoriasis is an autoimmune condition that has several variants. Autoimmune diseases tend to come together and are probably not separate conditions. So once you have an autoimmune disorder, you will likely have others.

2

Psoriatic arthritis is a “seronegative” arthropathy–This is to say there is no definitive blood test for the condition. Rheumatoid arthritis And other similar autoimmune diseases that attack your joints often have markers that can be detected in the blood, but many do not. For some of them, imaging of the joint is necessary to confirm the diagnosis because, on the MRI, the inflammation can be visualized.

3

In cases of psoriasis without systemic involvement–when there is no immune attack of the joints or ligaments–narrow-band Ultraviolet light is sometimes a preferred treatment*

*Torosian, A., Porter, C. L., & Feldman, S. R. (2022). Factors Influencing Patient Preferences for Phototherapy: A Survey Study. Cutis, 110, E3-E7.

4

Biologics are from living cells, not chemicals like most oral medications. Monoclonal antibodies, which interact with our immune system, are the most common of these medications. They are very expensive to manufacture because you often need entire football field-sized buildings full of liquid chromatography tubes to purify them. However, they are also some of the most profitable drugs ever invented, including the number one most profitable medicine of all time, Humira. It blocks human tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a inhibitor) and has made over $208 billion since its introduction. Although the list price of $50,000 a year may sound high, many new treatments are even more expensive.

5

Extremely rare diseases that didn't have treatments were a high priority for drug development. But if the drug companies wouldn't make a metric ton of money, they would not bother. Left to their own devices, they developed an array of common drugs for common conditions and sold them to many people. So Congress, in its limited wisdom, passed a law. That law made the patent on orphan drugs go on for 20 years. Medicare can't negotiate the price of the medications. Some very rare conditions have only 6000 people suffering from the disease on the earth. Maybe 2000 of those humans happen to live in the US. I'm making those numbers up, but they're not that far off. With 20 years of patent protection and the ability to charge literally anything you can imagine for a treatment, it's pretty profitable to charge 1.5 million any year for 2000 people every year for 20 years and make $60 billion off one drug.

6

Prior authorization is the process of an insurance company requiring a doctor to submit a request before a treatment can be prescribed. After the request is submitted, the insurance company can screw around in deciding whether they want to pay or not. In fairness, it's before they will pay for the prescribed treatment, but those two things end up being the same when medications are far too expensive for anybody to pay out of pocket. The idea with prior authorization was to require doctors to have some check on their prescribing practices so that they would not just prescribe wildly expensive things willy-nilly. In reality, prior authorization has become a very expensive mechanism that health insurance companies use to control their costs, but not necessarily downward. Because they can adjust what claims do and do not need to run into prior authorization or be denied, they can dynamically decide what they paid for or didn't pay for. Since insurance companies have regulations around how profitable they are allowed to be, it's really important for them not to overspend. But, at the same time, they can’t spend too little! They get to keep a fixed percentage of their costs as profits, and it's the profits that need to go up to maximize shareholder value. Prior authorization has been an extremely effective way to get that formula right without necessarily making it evident that that's what they're doing.

7

Specialty pharmacies dispense very expensive medications that must be carefully handled. So if the medication needs, for example, to be refrigerated in transit–and is wildly expensive–it will go through a specialty pharmacy, not your corner Walgreens.

8

Pharmacy benefit managers will become the star of the footnotes of the story, but the abridged version is they are the most profitable part of healthcare in America. More on those to follow! PBMS isn't just one dude. They are organizations legally allowed to place medication into “tiers”--Which determine what your copay is–and move money around, except they're called rebates, which makes them legal, thanks to legislation that exempts pharmacy benefit managers from the very illegal practice of kickbacks. They do this by calling them rebates and passing a “safe harbor” law to make the kickback legal in this context.

9

These evaluation and management services are utilized when the provider is involved in evaluating or managing patient health. Specialty care consultants, emergency room physicians, and primary care physicians commonly use billing codes. For example, office visits, hospital visits, home services, and preventive medicine services are considered E&M codes. On the other hand, codes for procedures like surgeries, radiology and diagnostic tests, and certain treatment therapies are not considered evaluation and management services.

10

Interleukins are one of a group of related proteins made by leukocytes (white blood cells) and other cells in the body. Interleukins regulate immune responses. Interleukins made in the laboratory are used as biological response modifiers to boost the immune system in cancer therapy. An interleukin is a type of cytokine.

11

An interleukin inhibitor is a biologic drug that blocks the traditional activity of an interleukin. These are used to block specific immune modulators in inflammation pathways. Use medication to have more tolerable side effect profiles than more broad immunosuppression possible with older drugs like methotrexate. Methotrexate is cheap as dirt, whereas interleukin inhibitors can be hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.

12

To be clear, although these two conditions occurring at the same time are a real thing, “Psoriasis with obsessionality” as one condition with one orphan drug is made up. Schmaltz is not a real drug, but the imagined combination of two existing treatment options for psoriatic arthritis: Interleukin 17 inhibitors (Like Taltz and Cosentyx) are real medications. The immune function modulated by proteins referred to as the JAK/STAT pathway currently has separate medications like Xeljanz.* Currently, insurance will not authorize the payment for both of these medications at once, even if they will be the most effective combination. It's not “medically necessary”--A topic that your author will say significantly more as the story continues. Dorothy deserves the best care, and if that means getting prior authorization for an expensive orphan drug, so be it!

*Hu, X., li, J., Fu, M. et al. The JAK/STAT signaling pathway: from bench to clinic. Sig Transduct Target Ther 6, 402 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-021-00791-1

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
5 Likes
5
4
Share
Previous
Next
