The Lord Satan Has A "Great Meeting" With Expensive Consultants.
It's not all damnation and torture.
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
AUG 06, 2023
∙ PAID
2
1
Share

Every once in a while, I like to take a little break from my endless flogging of things that are upsetting about healthcare and its unfortunate economics and focus on something light…like the Lord of Darkness and his recent meeting with some expensive consultants to help with the hell rebrand. This is in no way crucial or important. It’s only fun. I’m Owen Muir, M.D., and this is a daily newsletter!

The new content is almost free; some older stuff is behind a paywall. It’s worth paying for it, in my opinion. I cover health, the care thereof, technology, investing, psychiatry, neuromodulation, and the like.

Subscribed

Phil: Hi, I’m Phil. So, I understand that you are the Lord of Darkness here.

Lucifer: I am Lucifer.

Phil: I understand that you were a cofounder in the heaven venture. Is that right?

Lucifer: I was the highest of the angels.

A photo I took a lifetime ago, © Owen Muir, 1999

Phil: And, I understand that here, in hell, you reign supreme?

Lucifer: It does say, “Surrender all hope, ye who enter here.” right above the entrance.

Phil: I can see that. That may be construed as creating a hostile work environment, but I must get back to that.

Lucifer: I preside over suffering here in the lake of fire.

Phil: So would you say that suffering is an organizational Northstar?

Lucifer: There are endless sufferings here.

Phil: That sounds like it’s difficult to manualize. I understand you did some consulting work with the Gods of Asgard.

Lucifer: We did. It’s now referred to as Valhalla, Public Benefit Corporation. But, like, we’ve got a lot of problems here. The demons, they are just not giving it their all.

Phil: So you’re telling me there are some problems with the workplace culture?

Lucifer: Yes! It doesn’t seem to be about inflicting suffering anymore.

Phil: Look, Mr. Lucifer, I will level with you. There are some significant problems we see in the organization. Frankly, from a compliance standpoint, this is just a nightmare.

Lucifer: We take pride in our nightmarish hellscape.

Phil: I understand your pride in the nightmarishness; it is a literal hellscape. But the problem that we see, and … can I be frank?

Lucifer: The truth shall set you free.

Phil: This is the least OSHA-compliant workplace I’ve ever encountered in my entire career.

Lucifer: You’re saying…

Phil: I’m saying this whole place will get shut down. There is no way a lake of fire will pass muster with any investigator. There are no meaningful flame-retardant materials present. The sprinkler system is nonexistent. I haven’t seen a fire extinguisher anywhere.

Lucifer: It’s an eternal lake of fire.

Phil: And that’s exactly my point. We need controls that allow us to ensure the safety of all the demons laboring, and frankly, the hours are a bit too long to ensure they are not at risk for workplace injuries.

Lucifer: Like burns?

Phil: Exactly. Burn injuries are a leading cause of litigation against many of our clients.

Lucifer: It’s a lake made of actual fire. To torture of the damned.

Phil: And it’s going to have to be brought up to code. Look, I’m just being straight with you.

Lucifer: What kind of messaging will we have to put forward?

Phil: We’re thinking about the new hell.

Lucifer: The new hell?

Phil: It’s time to be damned differently. How’s that sound?

Lucifer: It doesn’t sound eternal.

Phil: Eternal wasn’t a strong brand in our polling. People focus more on workplaces that provide meaning, career, growth, and a meaningful stepping stone to their next career phase. Purgatory is hot right now. It’s where the demons want to be. And it just doesn’t seem like your traditional hell is providing advancement through to that next phase in a demon’s career.

Lucifer: Oh, Jesus.

Phil: Yes, he did quite well. He’s not having much difficulty recruiting right now while you are. So … damned, differently. What do we see? We see an opportunity.

Lucifer: There are no opportunities here. Not for anybody. It’s hell. This is the end of the road.

Phil: That might be true. It’s certainly true of Facebook. But they can still hire people. You can’t.

Lucifer: Have you considered that demons might not care?

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

Phil: You have a negative net promoter score. Stop smirking. Facebook went with a rebrand also. You saw that “Meta” thing?

Lucifer: I mean, it looks like bullshit to me.

Phil: But it was a successful rebrand. And that’s what Hell needs. We’re thinking… stay with me here: ABBDN. We took the letters from “Abaddon” and took out the vowels. The full name is ABBDN Research.

Lucifer: That sounds like a tech company.

Phil: Exactly. It doesn’t sound like a dead-end hellscape in which no one’s career goes anywhere.

Lucifer: ABBDN Research. Does that sound like Abbadon?

Phil: We thought you would like that. Abandon all hope… except that people are free to do their own research. ABBDN Research. It was a real hit with our marketing team.

Lucifer: It doesn’t sound…

Phil: The original version of that acronym was LHSP.

Lucifer: What does that stand for?

Phil: Lucifer, HellScape Partners, but an acronym.

Lucifer: I prefer ABBDN research.

Phil: So Lucifer, we have a marketing representative here because what we have on our hands is a marketing problem. They know to abandon all hope but don’t know exactly what they should be afraid of. So, we’re going to bring in Jeff from Marketing.

Jeff: Hell feels very nebulous. What would you say if I asked people how long they’d be suffering here?

Lucifer: It’s eternal torment.

Jeff: It’s evocative, but the word is too long. I’m not sure that’s going to translate. Tell me about how the lake of fire happened.

Lucifer: Well, we wanted to burn people alive, but it turns out that burning people alive individually is very time-consuming. And also, normally, when you burn people alive they’re looking for water, which is basically like looking for hope, and you’re supposed to abandon that at the door. So, we made the entire lake of fire. Got rid of all the water.

Jeff: You’re like an angel from heaven regarding marketing.

Lucifer: From thence, I fell, once.

Jeff: But, “Abandon all hope ye who enter here,” it just doesn’t resonate with the kids these days. We need something that will resonate with the next generation of the damned.

Lucifer: Uh…

Jeff: How about: “Hell, that’s fire.”

Lucifer: Wait, you mean literal fire?

Jeff: This guy. No, I mean fire, like the kids say these days.

Lucifer: God, this is intolerable.

Subscribed

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
2 Likes
∙
1 Restack
2
1
Share
Previous
Next
