The Online Reputation Management Hack For Healthcare Professionals
Surviving trolls, one positive review at a time
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
MAR 25, 2023
∙ PAID
2
Share

I am a physician. I am also an occasional troll for compliance. Negative reviews in healthcare are common, but unlike Denny’s managers, health professionals are limited in important respects to respond to criticism online.

One of the ways of dealing with this probem, while staying in compliance with all rules and regulations around Healthcare? Become a reviewer of things yourself. Google reviews are potent. The more you leave reviews, the more powerful you become…more than you could possibly imagine. It is a bit like the dark side, hate, and striking people down.

Except it’s the opposite. The more positive reviews colleagues, and, crucially, other things, the more of The Force you can muster.

Share The Frontier Psychiatrists

It is not lawful in most states to respond to patient reviews in a way that exposes protected information. Testimonials by patients also violate applicable legal statutes in NYS, and some (but not all) other states. You also can not solicit those reviews. If you look at fake reviews, it's pretty transparent. Fakers review a bunch of the the same business all at once. They are fake—except they drive algorithms that don't know this. The reverse is also true: by reviewing restaurants, gas stations, whatever, your reviews get flagged as genuine by the algorithms. This helps us push down the spam bots and trolls.

One thing you can do? Review your colleagues.

Review platforms like Yelp, Google, and other health reviews, and prioritize reviews from prolific reviewers. Reviewing others yourself makes your reviews more salient—to the bots, and human patients!

What happens when you respond to a physician review on Google, and then respond to thank your colleague for the review? This approach bumps up the search engine optimization of that review. Rob Dugger, M.D. from Sarasota Minds taught me this, and feel free to leave him a review right now to thank him!

I did it already. Because I also reviewed a few other things, it's the most relevant, you can see it there at the top!

This doesn't take much time and should be done a little bit by bit anyway. We should be reviewing only actual colleagues with whom we interact. Most reviews in Healthcare are one star or five stars.

Practice with me if you know me! Check out Fermata.Health on Google, and consider leaving it a review :

“Dr. Owen Muir provides the best guidance around reviews of any practice! Good advice in keeping with all appropriate guidelines! What a great physician!”

—best of imagined reviews 2023

I will then respond to your review and thank you for that review. Then you can go and review the restaurants you like. Then, review dry cleaners you like. And other doctors, etc. Leave a gracious review, and then thank any reviewers for their reviews of you. It is completely legal and gets the trolls out of the way. Patients read reviews, and so letting the world get more representative and accurate information is a service to all. Patients are vulnerable to scams and trolls, and having them scared off from good doctors by malicious trolls isn’t ok. Accurate information that isn’t revealing PHI. That is the sweet spot, absent dangerous sugar.

—Owen Scott Muir, M.D.

A publication to which one can subscribe, and should:

Subscribed

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
2 Likes
2
Share
Previous
Next
