Title: “We Made a Mistake”: A Shocking Leak from Amazon HQ! #RingsOfPower #OneMedical
URL: https://thefrontierpsychiatrists.substack.com/p/we-made-a-mistake-a-shocking-leak
Source element: <article>
---
“We Made a Mistake”: A Shocking Leak from Amazon HQ! #RingsOfPower #OneMedical
Originally a parody, now kinda accurate…
OWEN SCOTT MUIR, M.D.
NOV 30, 2022
∙ PAID
2
Share

I recently sat down with the head of Amazon Healthcare Mergers and Acquisitions. What follows is a transcript of this completely fictitious meeting:

Owen: There’s been a lot of blowback recently, amidst the relatively positive reception of the One Medical acquisition, about the really unfortunate reception of the most expensive TV show ever made. The Rings of Power has been a real flop.

Amazon: So… there was a mistake. Amazon is a big company, and we have a lot of silos. The acquisition of the Rings of Power was originally pinned up by HQ in the healthcare division, but due to an embarrassing series of misunderstandings, it ended up getting made into a TV show. At this point, we can all see how that went.

Owen: I watched the first episode. It was really bad.

Amazon: No one at Amazon disagrees. However, one of the reasons the narrative structure is so lacking has a lot to do with how we are approaching mergers and acquisitions in the health-tech space.

Owen: Like One Medical?

Amazon: Exactly. In fact, I think this is where the mixup might’ve been. We acquired One Life Health Inc.—that’s the management service organization that actually owns the intellectual property associated with One Medical.

Owen: OK, I’m following… I think?

Amazon: One medical. One ring. You see the problem.

Owen: Yes. Sadly, yes.

Amazon: Exactly. The One Medical acquisition made perfect sense, but people were trying to figure out the context. How are we going to integrate One Medical with our existing healthcare service line? And the answer to that, obviously, was leveraging the Rings of Power.

Owen: OK, you’re f-ing with me right?

Amazon: I’m not. They said you could never make money on books online either.

Owen: OK, help me out here: what were the Rings of Power supposed to do?

Amazon: Well, one of the major problems in healthcare is how the market is poorly integrated. Interoperability is the Achilles’ heel of healthcare. I think we can both agree on that?

Owen: It’s a major issue.

Amazon: So, given that major issue, we did a survey of plausible technical solutions, given our unbelievable backend with AWS. In fact, we actually had an AI built that scanned through every book on the Amazon platform, in order to find answers that were outside the traditional scope of what we might look at.

Owen: So this AI, it’s like Midjourney for mergers and acquisitions?

Amazon: Exactly. It’s built on the OpenAI SDK powered with AWS on the backend. So, after going through every book, what it kicked out, to our surprise, was Tolkien.

Owen: Wait, really?

Amazon: We were just as surprised. We ran the algorithm twice.

Owen: …

Amazon: We took it pretty seriously after a while! I mean, at first it was a lot of laughing, and a lot of us, unsurprisingly, are Lord of the Rings fans. Frankly, Bezos is a little obsessed with Sauron.

Owen: Because he’s a villain?

Amazon: Because he was relentless in product development. Customer service was, and is, the God we pray to at Amazon, and Sauron, say what you will, but that guy had relentless focus.

Owen: I mean, according to the Rings of Power, he spent hundreds of years working on his eventual return to power?

Amazon: We call that market research.

Owen: Got it.

Amazon: Most people missed it, because it was written in Elvish, you know how Tolkein was, but Sauron actually did customer interviews with each and every one of the orcs. He wanted to know what they thought of elves, how they related to them, what role Elvishness played in their lives, and what kind of brand story made sense.

Owen: The hero’s journey.

Amazon: Exactly—and in healthcare, our hero’s journey is about interoperability. We want one platform to bring all of the healthcare data together. Sound familiar?

Owen: I mean, a lot of people have thought about that…

Amazon: The rings of power, it turns out they are a metaphor! How do we get different stakeholders—dwarf lords in their halls of stone, mortal men with high morbidity and mortality, Medicare Advantage plans, traditional payers like Optum, the traditional wizards like Sauron and Gandalf, all together using one platform solution?

Owen: I mean, you don’t.

Amazon: Exactly. Each of them got their own Rings of Power. They apportioned them, and made brand stories, appealing to each of these individual cohorts. High morbidity and mortality humans, they got rings. The Dwarves, they have different health concerns, there’s a lot of heavy metal exposure in that population. Do you have any idea what mithril poisoning looks like? There’s a reason they’re also short. The burden of congenital metal exposure in that population—it’s just devastating.

Owen: It’s like lead exposure for Rochester, New York or Flint, Michigan.

Amazon: The rings of power were a brand story that worked. People wanted Rings of Power. Elves wanted Rings of Power. Dwarves wanted Rings of Power. What they wanted was their own brand story. Everyone wanted a relatable hero who was going on a hero’s journey.

Owen: Even Sauron.

Amazon: Even Sauron.

Owen: How did that play into Amazon’s healthcare plans?

Amazon: We needed proactive IP, and we needed to solve the brand story problem to be able to personalize the user experience for each of these use cases. But we also needed to make sure they were all using the same platform at the end of the day.

Owen: The one ring.

Amazon: To rule them all.

Owen: Wait a minute, so was One Medical a mistake also?

Amazon: So actually, yes, it was a little bit like freaky Friday. Amazon Health went after One Medical instead of the One Ring, and Amazon Prime Video went after the One Ring instead of a Signify Health docu-series, which just got snapped up by CVS. They are like the hobbits of mergers and acquisitions, sneaking in and acting like total thieves.

Owen: This is an amazing story.

Amazon: Not in TV show format it’s not.

The Frontier Psychiatrists is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Subscribed

Recommend The Frontier Psychiatrists to your readers
Owen Scott Muir, M.D. DFAACAP writes things about health and its care.
Recommend
2
Share
Previous
Next
